A Post By: Darren Rowse My first love in photography when I first got my trusty old Minolta SLR as a teenager was landscape photography. There’s something about getting out in nature with the challenge of capturing some of the amazing beauty that you see. Perhaps it fits with my personality type – but I loved the quietness and stillness of waiting for the perfect moment for the shot, scoping out an area for the best vantage point and then seeing the way that the light changed a scene over a few hours.

While I don’t get as much time as I’d like for Landscape Photography these days – I thought I’d jot down a few of the lessons that I learned in my early years of doing it. I’d love to hear your own tips in comments below.

Landscape Photography Tips

1. Maximize your Depth of Field

While there may be times that you want to get a little more creative and experiment with narrow depth of fields in your Landscape Photography – the normal approach is to ensure that as much of your scene is in focus as possible. The simplest way to do this is to choose a small Aperture setting (a large number) as the smaller your aperture the greater the depth of field in your shots.

Do keep in mind that smaller apertures mean less light is hitting your image sensor at any point in time so they will mean you need to compensate either by increasing your ISO or lengthening your shutter speed (or both).

PS: of course there are times when you can get some great results with a very shallow DOF in a landscape setting (see the picture of the double yellow line below).

2. Use a Tripod

As a result of the longer shutter speed that you may need to select to compensate for a small aperture you will need to find a way of ensuring your camera is completely still during the exposure. In fact even if you’re able to shoot at a fast shutter speed the practice of using a tripod can be beneficial to you. Also consider a cable or wireless shutter release mechanism for extra camera stillness.

Related Reading – Introduction to Tripods

Get more tips and tutorials like this one by subscribing to Digital Photography School via email or RSS

3. Look for a Focal Point

All shots need some sort of focal point to them and landscapes are no different – in fact landscape photographs without them end up looking rather empty and will leave your viewers eye wondering through the image with nowhere to rest (and they’ll generally move on quickly).

Focal points can take many forms in landscapes and could range from a building or structure, a striking tree, a boulder or rock formation, a silhouette etc.

Think not only about what the focal point is but where you place it. The rule of thirds might be useful here.

Related Reading – Focal Points in Photography

4. Think Foregrounds

One element that can set apart your landscape shots is to think carefully about the foreground of your shots and by placing points of interest in them. When you do this you give those viewing the shot a way into the image as well as creating a sense of depth in your shot.

Related Reading: Getting Foregrounds right in photography

5. Consider the Sky

Another element to consider is the sky in your landscape.

Most landscapes will either have a dominant foreground or sky – unless you have one or the other your shot can end up being fairly boring.

If you have a bland, boring sky – don’t let it dominate your shot and place the horizon in the upper third of your shot (however you’ll want to make sure your foreground is interesting). However if the sky is filled with drama and interesting cloud formations and colors – let it shine by placing the horizon lower.

Consider enhancing skies either in post production or with the use of filters (for example a polarizing filter can add color and contrast).

6. Lines

One of the questions to ask yourself as you take Landscape shots is ‘how am I leading the eye of those viewing this shot’? There are a number of ways of doing this (foregrounds is one) but one of the best ways into a shot is to provide viewers with lines that lead them into an image.

Lines give an image depth, scale and can be a point of interest in and of themselves by creating patterns in your shot.

Related Reading: Using lines in photography (mini-series)

7. Capture Movement

When most people think about landscapes they think of calm, serene and passive environments – however landscapes are rarely completely still and to convey this movement in an image will add drama, mood and create a point of interest.

Examples – wind in trees, waves on a beach, water flowing over a waterfall, birds flying over head, moving clouds.

Capturing this movement generally means you need to look at a longer shutter speed (sometimes quite a few seconds). Of course this means more light hitting your sensor which will mean you need to either go for a small Aperture, use some sort of a filter or even shoot at the start or end of the day when there is less light.

8. Work with the Weather

A scene can change dramatically depending upon the weather at any given moment. As a result, choosing the right time to shoot is of real importance.

Many beginner photographers see a sunny day and think that it’s the best time to go out with their camera – however an overcast day that is threatening to rain might present you with a much better opportunity to create an image with real mood and ominous overtones. Look for storms, wind, mist, dramatic clouds, sun shining through dark skies, rainbows, sunsets and sunrises etc and work with these variations in the weather rather than just waiting for the next sunny blue sky day.

9. Work the Golden Hours

I chatted with one photographer recently who told me that he never shoots during the day – his only shooting times are around dawn and dusk – because that’s when the light is best and he find that landscapes come alive.

These ‘golden’ hours are great for landscapes for a number of reasons – none the least of which is the ‘golden’ light that it often presents us with. The other reason that I love these times is the angle of the light and how it can impact a scene – creating interesting patterns, dimensions and textures.

10. Think about Horizons

It’s an old tip but a good one – before you take a landscape shot always consider the horizon on two fronts.

Is it straight? – while you can always straighten images later in post production it’s easier if you get it right in camera.

– while you can always straighten images later in post production it’s easier if you get it right in camera. Where is it compositionally? – a compositionally natural spot for a horizon is on one of the thirds lines in an image (either the top third or the bottom one) rather than completely in the middle. Of course rules are meant to be broken – but I find that unless it’s a very striking image that the rule of thirds usually works here.

Related Reading: Getting Horizons Horizontal

11. Change your Point of View

You drive up to the scenic lookout, get out of the car, grab your camera, turn it on, walk up to the barrier, raise the camera to your eye, rotate left and right a little, zoom a little and take your shot before getting back in the car to go to the next scenic lookout.

We’ve all done it – however this process doesn’t generally lead to the ‘wow’ shot that many of us are looking for.

Take a little more time with your shots – particularly in finding a more interesting point of view to shoot from. This might start with finding a different spot to shoot from than the scenic look out (wander down paths, look for new angles etc), could mean getting down onto the ground to shot from down low or finding a higher up vantage point to shoot from.

Explore the environment and experiment with different view points and you could find something truly unique.


A Guest Post by Todd Sisson from www.sisson.co.nz and author of our Living Landscapes eBook – a guide to taking stunning Landscapes.

As a landscape photographer I am constantly seeking that next X-factor shot – an image that leaps from the screen or page and demands the viewer’s attention – preferably attention of the favourable variety.

If you spend an hour or two on a photosharing site like Flickr viewing landscape images in un- curated groups you will note that a very small percentage of the total image population stands out from the crowd.

However, if you view a carefully curated collection of top-shelf landscape images you will probably start to notice some themes appearing. Certain visual cues and devices appear across multiple images – there will often be subtle commonalities between these attention hogging photos.

In many instances these images will possess the qualities of what I consider a dynamic landscape image.

What is a Dynamic Landscape Image?

There is no dictionary entry that defines a Dynamic Landscape Image* – heck, there’s not even a Wikipedia entry – so it is a somewhat personal interpretation.

To my mind, a dynamic landscape image is one that in some way conveys the energy and scale of the natural world. Dynamic images also often seek to breach the confines of their 2D medium by inferring a sense of depth – many truly dynamic image have an almost 3D quality about them.

*As far as I am aware, the term Dynamic Landscape was first popularised by the late Galen Rowell – one of the most influential American landscape photographers of his generation. Rowell used the term to demarcate his work from the somewhat literal colour landscape photography that dominated the early 1970’s. Although he was certainly not the only photographer employing these principles in his work, he appears to have been an excellent self-promoter and the term is somewhat synonymous with his name.

Dynamic Composition

Composition is the backbone of all great photos – dynamic or otherwise – but it is essential in the creation of a truly strong landscape image.

I feel that the goal of a successful composition is to draw the eye into image and hold it there for as long as possible – which is seemingly, a maximum 15 milliseconds these days*. The following image is an example of an image that I feel achieves this objective.

This image combines all of the elements that I feel comprise a Dynamic Landscape Image:

Leading or converging lines

Interesting perspective

Visually interesting foreground elements

Visually interesting mid-ground & background elements

Vivid colour or incredible light

Vision-locking tonal control

Suggestion of movement

It is important to note that not all dynamic landscape images possess all of these factors. In fact, it is depressingly rare to have it all come together in one moment. It must also be stated that what follows is not a recipe for creating great images. Photography can only be practised as an art when personal interpretation is injected into the process – only use this information as a guideline for evolving your own images.

So let’s have a very quick look at each of these Dynamic Landscape factors.

Leading Lines & Converging Lines

One of the simplest ways to draw a viewer’s attention into an image is to use converging or leading lines. Converging lines have been used by painters for centuries to create the illusion of depth within a 2 dimensional medium.

This is why photos of wharves, roads, and rivers make such successful photographic subjects. Although many consider such subjects to be cliches, I strongly council my workshop students to shoot them heavily to build an awareness of the power of a line in an image.

Leading lines not only draw attention into the image, they can also help to hold the eye within the confines of the image.

Check out the crudely overlaid wharf image below combines the strong converging lines of the wharf with secondary supporting lines in the water, hills and clouds.

Look for these lines whenever you are shooting – they are almost everywhere.

Interesting Perspective

As a photographer you are an artist not a forensic documentarian. You get paid the mega-bucks and live the champagne lifestyle to show your audience something a little different – that is your raison d’être.

Hence I rarely find myself shooting at my natural standing position. For some reason, compositions seem to get more dynamic the closer you are to the ground/mud/ snow/ice-encrusted cow turd – it’s just the way it is.

This is especially apparent when using an ultra-wide lens. Subject matter becomes incredibly diminutive and interesting leading lines really lose their visual power when viewed from 5 or 6 feet high – so try getting uncomfortably close and low.

Aim high also. Look for ways to gain elevation to find that privileged viewpoint – I find that this often works really well when shooting telephoto lengths for some reason. Try scrambling up banks, standing on cars and sitting on your wife’s/husband’s shoulders (sans tripod) in an effort to find an interesting perspective.

Foreground Elements

I believe that a dynamic image almost always possesses a strong foreground element, or elements, that complement the greater scene.

Take a sunset/sunrise for example. Sure, spectacular light makes for great images, but personally photos that contain nothing but vast expanses of super-saucy red clouds do little to engage me as a viewer.

The best dynamic images typically have a strong point of interest in the lower half, or foreground. This is your visual entree into an image. If your foreground element happens to include leading lines you are quite possibly onto the much vaunted money-shot.

Visually interesting Background Elements

I often compose back to front. Firstly I will find the subject of my image, say a spectacular sunset playing out on mountains, and then I will run around like a deranged prison escapee in search of a foreground element to complement the background.

It is very much a balancing act – defining who or what element gets to play the lead role in your composition. Ideally the background is where the eye should gravitate to and the foreground should pick up a gong for best supporting actor.

Unusually, I didn’t scramble to find a foreground element for this image – I staggered. Four minutes earlier I had been happily sleeping in the back of my truck – my alarm went off and I saw this – panic ensued….

Vivid Colour or Incredible Light

By now it should be obvious that I have some un-checked colour-dependancy issues. I love colour*, especially natural light shows. However, I feel that vivid colour needs to be kept in balance and be a part of the overall composition. Too often I see images that rely solely upon dollops of super- saturated colour.

For a dynamic landscape image to work, balance must prevail. Hence I attempt to avoid filling the frame with too much colour (yes, there is such a thing – see below).

*I am even partial to the American version – colour.

Vision-locking Tonal Control

I am tempted to trademark this term – it sounds like a mind-control experiment deployed by shady branches of the US intelligence community.

Basically all I am referring to is the phenomenon of vignetting.

The eye is drawn towards lightness within an image, particularly near the centre of frame. Furthermore, the eye is restrained by darkness at the edges of the frame.

When employed deftly, the viewer’s eye is gently drawn into the image by lightness and held there by the darker edges of the image.

Suggested Motion

Suggested motion, by way of blur or frozen motion is not always an achievable, or desirable, element to utilise within an image – but it can add another layer of dynamism to a composition.

Don’t just get locked into shooting long exposures either – frozen, or partially-frozen motion can convey movement just as well as a long exposure in some circumstances (see the first image, Summer Storm, for an example of this).

Can Dynamic Landscape Images be B&W?

Absolutely. There are many thousands of truly incredible B&W dynamic landscape images. No style renders texture and contrast better than B&W – at it’s best it is magnificent.

In order to compensate for their ‘lost’ colour Black & Whiters will often apply industrial grade quantities of Vision Locking Tonal Control (that’s why vignette sliders to go -100) and rely heavily upon strong graphical elements such as leading lines (you will find a lot of B&W photos of wharves and sewerage pipes heading out to sea).

I would show you an example of this, but I am mono-challenged. If you want to see B&W Dynamic landscapes at their best check out the work of Mitch Dobrowner & Hengki Koentjoro.

So Are All Good Landscape Images ‘Dynamic’?

Not at all. Stunning images can be made by avoiding almost all of the techniques that I have just espoused in this essay. Dynamic Landscape composition is just one style of landscape photography.

In fact, many of my favourite images by others are beautifully composed static, flat compositions. These ‘static’ images respectfully comply with the two dimensional constraints of the photographic medium and rely upon a separate set of visual devices in order to ‘succeed’.

Want to learn more about Landscape Photography? Check out Todd’s eBook Living Landscapes: a Guide to Stunning Landscape Photography.

Todd & Sarah Sisson are full-time landscape photographers based in Central Otago New Zealand.


By Declan O’Neill

“Landscape photography is the supreme test of the photographer – and often the supreme disappointment.” – Ansel Adams.

So many times I have pointed my camera at a landscape simply because it was there and looked beautiful. This was a a trap. I had been lured me into believing that simply taking the photograph was worthwhile in itself. All I had done was hold a mirror up to nature. I had not made the photograph. The image made no statement and expressed nothing about my own perspective.

Ansel Adams understood that the photographer needs to find a voice through the landscape. For years I floundered because I had nothing to convey other than the obvious beauty of the land. I realised that I had to find a way to engage with the landscape because, if I couldn’t, then neither could the people who saw my photographs.

The following tips are just reflections based on a personal philosophy of what I believe is important in landscape photography.

1. Have Something to Say about the Landscape

The land takes time to read and to understand. You have to stand still and see the way light changes the contours and shapes. As the sun moves, it lights forests and streams in dramatically different ways.

It took me a long time to see that light gives landscape its own voice. Light creates mood and emotion in landscape. The land is a huge canvas on which light paints a complex and delicate picture.

For me, photography is about capturing the way in which light transforms the land. My decisions, therefore, about what to photograph and how to compose the shot are all dictated by the question, ‘Does this say something about light and landscape?’ This simple question leads me to reject many frames which, while beautiful, present no opportunity to explore my chosen theme.

2. Get up Early!

If given a choice between dawn and sunset I would always choose the former. I have nothing against sunset shots but I usually find that there is nothing original that I can add to the thousands of sunset photographs I have seen.

Dawn light, however, is always surprising. You never quite know what you’re going to get as you wait in the darkness.

It is rather like wildlife photography because you might get the shot you have wanted for years or you might get nothing. Dawn light can range from the most delicate dusky pink to a warm yellow.

Keep an eye on weather forecasts because, if you are lucky enough to live in an area with really cold nights and clear skies, you can sometimes catch wonderful cloud and vapour effects which have disappeared by the time the rest of the world is awake!

3. Imperfection is Fine!

Landscape photography is made especially difficult by the huge dynamic range you encounter. There is no way of controlling light balance in the field.

ND filters sometimes help but I find them fiddly and often not right for the particular location I have chosen. Often I have to reject a magnificent opportunity because there is simply too wide a dynamic range.

I am not a fan of HDR techniques or software. They give themselves away and I feel that they destroy the integrity of the shot. Most shots can be light balanced on the computer. Sometimes, however, the shot is actually better because of impossible dynamic range.

The photo of mussel beds in the Marlborough Sounds, New Zealand would probably be rejected by most camera club competitions. It might have been possible to grab a little detail from the land but I rather like the mystery of the black geometric block against the hammered silver of the water.

It’s technically a rather poor photograph but it has something that draws you to examine it more closely. Look beyond getting the perfectly lit shot and see the potential of the subject.

4. Look Behind You!

It is so easy to see the money shot and forget to look around.

The photograph of willow trees was taken at dusk at Lake Wanaka, New Zealand. The lake has one of the most beautiful vistas in the world but at dusk the sun is coming from behind the surrounding mountains and they look beautiful but, dare I say, somewhat commonplace.

Having decided that the water/sunset shot was not worth taking, I was walking back to the car when I happened to look behind me and saw the trees.

The obvious shot is not always the best one. Learn to look hard.

5. Make use of Planning Software

I have two pieces of software that are vital for field trips. The first is called The Photographers Ephemeris.

In brief, it allows you to choose any location in the world, on any date and at any time and it shows exactly where the sun will be. You can plan the best day and time to go to a particular location and also decide the exact spot from which to take the shot. If you are serious about landscape photography you need this tool.

The two photographs illustrate how the sun’s position can define the impact and message of your photograph.

The wide angle photo was taken late afternoon in September (early spring in New Zealand). The sun’s reflection on the river turns it to silver but also creates blow out problems.

The other photograph was taken mid morning in July (mid-winter in New Zealand). The other tool which is vital is a 1:50000 map which shows contours.

For New Zealand I use Mapapp NZ SI from the Apple App store. Sat Nav maps are not detailed enough and they don’t have contour details. Any maps that download from the Internet are also useless as I am often out of cell phone range. A good map allows you to guess what the terrain looks like and often gives clues about lines of sight. Being able to make sense of these detailed topographical maps can often save a lot of time driving down dirt roads hoping to find that perfect shot!

6. Equipment is not Important

Better equipment does not produce better photographs any more than a better pen lets you write that great novel you’re planning! Every photographer needs equipment but you should treat it like an author treats their writing implement. It is just a vehicle to transmit what is in your brain to someone else. You need a point of view (see tip one) and then you can use anything from a smart phone to a Nikon D800.

Remember that you compose photographs and the camera takes photographs. The photograph of a misty morning could have been taken on any camera. If you believe that a higher pixel count or a faster, sharper lens helps you compose better photographs then join the techno circus.

7. Don’t try and Paint Landscape with a Camera

There is quite a vogue on the Internet for photographs which have been heavily post processed or which use fashionable techniques like x10 ND filters to make water look like smooth silk.

Why can’t we let nature speak for itself? It does just fine without effects filters. The same applies to the use of image editing software. Used sensitively, it helps the landscape have its own voice. Used crudely, it imposes our decisions about what the landscape should have looked like.

The best photography mines a seam in our conscious and unconscious. That is why heavily photoshopped, idealised versions of landscape often leave us cold. They are telling a story that isn’t really true. We recognise the artifice of the orange sky and super-saturated grass.

These are mute photographs because they don’t speak with their own voice. Photographs with integrity invite us to explore them. Like an abstract painting, a landscape photograph should throw us back to our internal life. Photographs can be metaphors but they should be metaphors created in the mind of the viewer rather than of the photographer.

If you want to create your own version of what the scene looked like then take up painting!

8. Bad weather is Good Weather

Cloud and rain are not the most encouraging weather conditions yet they often present opportunities far more exciting than those of a cloudless day.

The photo of evening rain in the Marlborough Sounds, New Zealand was taken at the end of a dispiriting day searching for shots. It takes a lot of patience and optimism to drive hundreds of kilometres in the rain but the rewards are there more often than not. If you keep your eyes open there is always something worth photographing.

Interestingly, when this photograph was submitted to an image bank it was rejected on the grounds it had been photoshopped to make it monochrome. It hadn’t been. Nature sometimes surprises with extraordinary effects which aren’t a product of any software programme.

9. Keep going Back

Luck plays a huge part in getting those special shots. If you find a place that offers great potential, keep returning because you will, almost certainly, improve on your first shots.

The photographs of Lake Taniwha, New Zealand were taken five days apart. They both tell a different story and I’m sure the next time I go back it will look different again.

10. Don’t listen to all the advice you get!

Finding your own voice as a photographer means choosing carefully what advice to take.

For example, the conventional wisdom is that you should try and have an object of interest in the foreground of wide landscape shots. This is presumably based on the idea that landscape is far too boring on its own and needs a gazing human or a grazing cow to grab your attention.

If you are going to place an object between your viewer and the landscape than it needs to tell some sort of story. It shouldn’t just be there for the sake of it. The best photography breaks rules.

All of the above can really be summarised in one sentence. Decide what interests you about landscape and then compose and edit your shots in a way that allows the land to speak with its own voice.

Declan is a semi-retired professional photographer living in the South Island of New Zealand. See more of his work on his website.A Post By: Anne McKinnell


When you are out in the field and you’re not sure if your the image you are making is any good, go through this quick mental checklist to see if your image contains these four essential ingredients.

1. Good Light

Light is by far the most important element of a landscape photograph. A photograph of a stunning location taken in harsh mid-day light will fall flat. A photograph of a boring location taken at that perfect moment when the light is magical will turn into a unique and memorable photograph.

I don’t actually believe that there is any kind of light that is inherently bad. You just have to know what to do with the light conditions that you are given.

The golden hour light of sunrise and sunset are usually a favourite time for photographers. My favourite time is the blue hour: twilight. It’s hard to go wrong with these two types of light.

When you have a day with bright harsh sunlight, take advantage of the opportunity to look for interesting shadows.

The white sky of an overcast day is an excellent time to photograph close-ups.

And what about those stormy days? Those can be the best of all with the dramatic clouds that accompany a storm.

2. Main Subject

The next thing is to make sure you have a main subject. That may sound pretty obvious but keep it in mind. You may find yourself, as I sometimes do, making an image of some general landscape without a clear subject. It’s just some land with some trees and maybe some water. You need to decide what the subject is and that will help you make an image that is more compelling.

When I get to a location I like to think of what it is about that place that grabbed my attention and I make that the main subject. That’s not to say you cannot then turn your attention to another main subject later, but if you have too many subjects in your scene, none of them with be the main subject and your image will be too general to be interesting.

While we’re thinking about the main subject, what is it about that subject that you like? Having descriptive words in your head when you are making an image will help you focus and bring that description into the image. What is it about the lake you like? Is it the reflection? The shape? The peacefulness? How it is so clear you can see the bottom? Not only will this help you convey meaning in your image, but it will help you write about it later.

3. Clean Background

Just as important as the main subject is what is behind it.

Clutter and distracting elements can ruin an otherwise good image. This is where perspective becomes important. You must find an angle to photograph your subject so there are no distracting elements in the background. That can mean getting up high and shooting down on your subject so the background is filled with only one texture, or getting low and shooting upwards so the background is filled with only sky.

Try to isolate your subject and simplify the image as much as possible.

4. Interesting Composition

I like to think of photography as the opposite of painting. Painters start with a blank canvas and start adding things to it, whereas photographers are presented with a scene full of details and must start eliminating things from it until it contains only the most important elements of the scene. Then, those elements must be arranged to create an interesting graphic design.

Remember the building blocks of composition that you can rely on to create interesting graphic designs:

The “trick,” if there is one, is to make all four of these things come together. It will take patience, perseverance, and a little luck.A Post By: Anne McKinnell


When you are out in the field and you’re not sure if your the image you are making is any good, go through this quick mental checklist to see if your image contains these four essential ingredients.

1. Good Light

Light is by far the most important element of a landscape photograph. A photograph of a stunning location taken in harsh mid-day light will fall flat. A photograph of a boring location taken at that perfect moment when the light is magical will turn into a unique and memorable photograph.

I don’t actually believe that there is any kind of light that is inherently bad. You just have to know what to do with the light conditions that you are given.

The golden hour light of sunrise and sunset are usually a favourite time for photographers. My favourite time is the blue hour: twilight. It’s hard to go wrong with these two types of light.

When you have a day with bright harsh sunlight, take advantage of the opportunity to look for interesting shadows.

The white sky of an overcast day is an excellent time to photograph close-ups.

And what about those stormy days? Those can be the best of all with the dramatic clouds that accompany a storm.

2. Main Subject

The next thing is to make sure you have a main subject. That may sound pretty obvious but keep it in mind. You may find yourself, as I sometimes do, making an image of some general landscape without a clear subject. It’s just some land with some trees and maybe some water. You need to decide what the subject is and that will help you make an image that is more compelling.

When I get to a location I like to think of what it is about that place that grabbed my attention and I make that the main subject. That’s not to say you cannot then turn your attention to another main subject later, but if you have too many subjects in your scene, none of them with be the main subject and your image will be too general to be interesting.

While we’re thinking about the main subject, what is it about that subject that you like? Having descriptive words in your head when you are making an image will help you focus and bring that description into the image. What is it about the lake you like? Is it the reflection? The shape? The peacefulness? How it is so clear you can see the bottom? Not only will this help you convey meaning in your image, but it will help you write about it later.

3. Clean Background

Just as important as the main subject is what is behind it.

Clutter and distracting elements can ruin an otherwise good image. This is where perspective becomes important. You must find an angle to photograph your subject so there are no distracting elements in the background. That can mean getting up high and shooting down on your subject so the background is filled with only one texture, or getting low and shooting upwards so the background is filled with only sky.

Try to isolate your subject and simplify the image as much as possible.

4. Interesting Composition

I like to think of photography as the opposite of painting. Painters start with a blank canvas and start adding things to it, whereas photographers are presented with a scene full of details and must start eliminating things from it until it contains only the most important elements of the scene. Then, those elements must be arranged to create an interesting graphic design.

Remember the building blocks of composition that you can rely on to create interesting graphic designs:

The “trick,” if there is one, is to make all four of these things come together. It will take patience, perseverance, and a little luck
Coastal landscapes can be an incredibly satisfying subject for landscape photographers and can result in some stunning images. Besides abiding by the general guidelines for landscape photography, here are a few other things you might like to think about next time you’re down by the coast with your camera.

1. Get There at the Right Time

While coastal landscape photography can be done at any time of the day or night, most photographers who are consistently getting great results will favour golden hour or blue hour as their favourite times to shoot. Getting there around these times allows you to capture stunning changing lighting conditions. Get used to shooting from before sunrise or until after sunset.

2. Get an ND Grad Filter

The secret sauce of coastal landscapes that are shot around golden and blue hours is an ND grad filter – a weapon of choice for a lot of landscape photographers. This simply makes it a lot easier to get a correct exposure on your skies (which basically act as a huge and bright light source) at the same time as the fore and mid-ground which can often be in shadow at the same time.

3. Reduce Camera Shake

Shooting in lowish light means that you are going to have to stabilise your camera as best you can. That usually means a tripod for starters. You might also like to employ a remote shutter release or at least the delayed timing functionality that is standard with a lot of DSLRs.

4. Remember Your Foregrounds

When you’re concentrating on the beautiful colours of a sky in the golden or blue hours it can be very easy to forget that foreground interest can really add an element of interest to a coastal landscape that is irreplaceable. Usually a little scouting around a location will turn up all sorts of potentially interesting foregrounds that can complete your composition.

5. Shutter Speed and Water

Remember that if you are taking photographs in low light, with a slow shutter speed then water can appear blurred or misty. Personally I like that effect. If you don’t then you will want to make your shutter speed faster and adjust your other settings accordingly. This can get difficult in low light, so it’s probably an idea in this case to get to the location when there’s a little more light around. Alternatively you could shoot with wider apertures or increase the ISO but neither of those options is necessarily great for landscapes (depending on your intentions).

6. Don’t Forget Black and White

While the colours of coastal landscape photography are a great reason to be attracted to this subject, amazing results can also be had with black and white (and you don’t necessarily even have to shoot at blue or golden hour to get them). Play with your images in post production and test the effects of black and white – sometimes you can get a real gem by accident, but going with the intent of shooting b&w can get you even better results.

7. Turn Around

At popular photography locations on the coast around the time of sunset, there is a big mistake you see the entire crowd make most of the time (assuming you’re shooting in a location that’s popular with photographers). They only look towards the sun. Quite often there is amazing light in the other direction too – especially if there are a few clouds around! Don’t forget to at least look at what is happening in the rest of the sky.

This is by no means an exhaustive list of tips for coastal landscapes (in fact you can even find some other great ideas right here on DPS). Why not share some of your own tips in the comments?

Rob Wood is the founder of Light Stalking. He recommends you check out “How This Award Winning Coastal Photograph Was Taken” and this guide to “Landscape Photography for the Serious Amateur“.A Post By: Darren Rowse

Where should I focus when taking a Landscape Shot?

When shooting a typical landscape image it is normal to attempt to keep as much of the image in focus as possible.

This means selecting a small Aperture (remember the larger the number the smaller the actual Aperture) to ensure that you end up with a large depth of field. This will ensure that parts of the image that are both close and far away from you have a good chance of being somewhat in focus.

But at what point in the shot should you actually focus the image?

I suspect that many digital camera owners would set the focal point as the middle of the shot – or even at the horizon – however it might not actually be the ideal place to focus your camera.

I chatted this week with a landscape photographer who shared this tip:

‘Focus in the lower half of the image – at around the ‘thirdway’ point.’

Ok – I’m not sure if ‘thirdway‘ is an actual word – but what he was suggesting is that the point that will help you get the maximum amount of your shot in focus is at a point around a third of the way up an image (as highlighted above).

This is a fairly general rule and you’d want to ignore if if your landscape shot had a particular point of interest in it that wasn’t on the third line. However if your landscape shot doesn’t have one specific point of interest it is probably a rule worth using.

My photographer friend went on to give a rather complicated reasoning for focusing upon this point a third of the way into an image that I don’t wish to repeat here for fear of losing many – however, in general if you focus too far into your image you’ll end up with objects in the distance nice and sharp but anything close to you noticeably out of focus. If you focus at the lower third you increase the depth of field in the foreground and as depth of field extends further behind a focal point than in front of it the distant objects will be reasonably sharp too.

Disclaimer – I should say that in researching this technique I found a lot of debate on the topic and a lot of technical language – in actual fact this ‘rule’ depends on many factors including the focal length of your lens, the format you’re shooting in (vertical or horizontal), the aperture you’re using and how far the scene extends away from you.

However I’ve found it to be a useful ‘rule’ to know and to start with when shooting landscapes. Whether you focus exactly on the third way point probably doesn’t matter that much – however the key is not to focus on the horizon but closer to you as the photographer.

Perhaps it’s one of those ‘one percent’ rules that won’t make a lot of difference for most of us – but when you’re taking high level landscape shots it’s often the little things that count!

A Guest Contribution by Todd Sisson – author of our Landscape Photography eBook.

The majority of landscape images are photographed in the horizontal aspect. I guess this because the horizontal format approximates the way in which we perceive ‘reality.’ However landscapes look stunning in the vertical format and often the unique characteristics of the upright format suit a scene better than a horizontal* composition. I am guilty of undershooting verticals these days, primarily for commercial reasons, but in any given shooting situation I try to remind myself to seek both a vertical and a horizontal composition from a scene.

Here’s why I think you should photograph vertically and some quick tips for successful upright image making.

Reason One: Verticals are Easy to Learn

Vertical composition using a wide angle or ultra-wide lens is the fast track to making interesting landscape images. My first successful landscapes were all vertical compositions where I found a moderately photogenic foreground object and used this to lead into the greater scene. To this day I find it easier to frame up an interesting sunset in the vertical format. I use rocks, grasses, flowers – just about anything with form to introduce the viewer’s eye to the scene.

Reason Two: Vertical Compositions can be more Dynamic

In this dPS blog post, I explained the principles of ‘dynamic landscape compositions’. What I didn’t reveal in that article (for some inexplicable reason) was that vertical compositions can often accentuate the dynamic qualities of an image – particularly when using an ultra-wide lens.

Reason Three: Verticals Sell Well

In the introduction I polluted the artistic sanctity of the article by mentioning ‘commercial reasons’. Five years ago we made most of our living from selling postcards of our images – horizontal postcards vastly outsell vertical postcards, and they fit better on a display stand, so I found myself inadvertently locked into a horizontal mindset (as I mentioned last week, deep thought and self-awareness are not my strong point). This sales trend is definitely mirrored in our website where the bulk of our print sales are horizontal.

However, In the past year we have ramped up our stock photography activity and this is one area where vertical images sell extremely well – especially for editorial usage and magazine covers where the format works beautifully with the vertical layout of printed media. Consequently, we are shooting a lot more vertical images. You may not be a full-time photographer but there are myriad ways to earn money from your photographic hobby these days, don’t leave money on the table – shoot verticals along with your horizontal compositions.

Vertical Shooting Tip 1: Get Low and Close

As I noted in the previous image, getting low and close accentuates the visual power of leading lines and dramatically increases the visual weight of foreground features. To go low you will need to use a tripod that has no centre column in order to get super close to the ground, I have detailed our tripod advice here which may be of interest if you are perplexed by the ins and outs of the tripod purchasing process.

Vertical Shooting Tip 2: Get High and Close

When using an ultra-wide lens it is possible to include the full sweep of a scene and accentuate the visual dynamics of the image by getting above the foreground elements and composing vertically. To achieve this you will need a tripod that extends well above the height of your subject matter and then angle the camera downwards.

Vertical Shooting Tip 3: Break down the Composition

When composing strong verticals I tend to ‘break down’ the scene into foreground, midground and background (the same thinking helps with horizontal images of course). A good composition will contain interest in all three of these visual zones – which roughly approximates the rule of thirds compositional guidelines.

Vertical Shooting Tip 4: – Leave some Space

Having just referred to the dreaded rule of thirds, I feel it my duty to throw a spanner into the works. Try messing with your vertical compositions by leaving ‘too much’ empty space. Dead space can look cool and graphic designers love it for dropping text into (sales tip).

Vertical Shooting Tip 5: Try Telephoto Verticals

Telephoto verticals are a particularly attractive compositional option, particularly around mountains. Because the long edge is oriented top to bottom you can exploit telephoto compression more effectively (by allowing more foreground into the frame at longer focal lengths and emphasizing the height differential across the scene).

Vertical Shooting Tip 6: Invest in an L-Bracket

An L-bracket or ‘L-plate’ is an L­-shaped (surprise, surprise!) tripod mounting plate that wraps around your camera body. This allows you to effortlessly mount your camera in the vertical orientation without having to flop the ballhead’s mounting point over on it’s side. Never again will you have to fight gravity and adjust tripod legs in order to get the camera leveled when shooting vertically – genius!

You will find a bit more information on the benefits of L-plates here on our website.

*I use the terms vertical or horizontal because the commonly used ‘portrait’ and ‘landscape’ terminology makes me abnormally irascible and grumpy. These terms are a nonsensical hangover derived from a Windows 95 printer options dialog box (maybe this riles my inner Mac Veteran). After all, a portrait can be photographed vertically or horizontally and likewise a landscape…..

Todd & Sarah Sisson are full-time landscape photographers based in Central Otago New Zealand. They are the authors of our new eBook Loving Landscapes: A Guide to Landscape Photography Workflow and Post Processing.

Their work can be found as fine art prints & canvas prints at www.sisson.co.nz They can be found on Facebook, Google Plus and Twitter.A Post By: Eric Leslie

Waterfalls are a very popular subject for landscape photographers. The draw to their natural beauty is clear, but sometimes coming home with the best shots is harder than you might think. As the curator for the Google+ Photography theme, #WaterfallWednesday I get asked how to take better pictures of waterfalls every week. So let me share some tips with you.

1. Your gear is good enough

The first thing most people suggest you need in order to shoot waterfalls is a complete quiver of neutral density (ND) filters to get a long exposure. Forget that! Let’s start with a camera that can shoot on manual and a tripod. That’s all you need. The biggest problem with slapping a dark ND filter on your lens is still the sun. When it’s bright overhead, you have bright “hot spots” and dark shadows that don’t look great. The light is harsh and flat. The best thing to do is show up at sunrise and sunset. Waterfalls are often in deep canyons, so as long as the sun is behind the mountains with the whole waterfall in the shade, you can achieve a long exposure with nice even light. In fact, you can plan ahead to maximize this. If you think about it, if the waterfall you’re wanting to shoot is facing east, sunrise would not be the best time of day because it will catch the light right on the falls. So an east facing waterfall will be best shot in the late afternoon.

2. Read the waterfall

How long does the exposure actually need to be? I think the answer varies like people’s taste in fast food. Personally I categorize waterfalls into two different categories. There are the falls that rage with so much water they take your breath away. The others are dainty and delicate. So keeping in mind I don’t want the waterfall to be a detail-less blob of white water, you need to set the exposure appropriately.

On Manual, I usually start with the slowest ISO my camera can go, 100. Then I set my aperture small enough to maximize focus, usually around f/8 to f/10. Then I see what kinds of shutter speeds that nets.

For the big falls, I try to keep my exposure under a second. Anything between ¼ to a full second will show the water’s motion and still retain all the detail in that movement.

Small stringy waterfalls just love putting on a show with longer exposures. These shots look great when you can go as long as possible. Don’t be afraid of the small aperture police who say you will lose sharpness. Photography is always about compromises and in this case, the slightest loss in sharpness only visible when viewed at 200% is greatly outweighed by capturing the water’s movement. Don’t be afraid to use f/22 if you need it. I try to shoot for exposures 1-4 seconds long at these kinds of waterfalls.

3. Save the Trees

Have you ever tried to shoot a waterfall with a long exposure and noticed that the leaves on the trees and plants move with just the slightest breeze? You’ve probably seen people take a bracket of a landscape to compress the dynamic range of light into a single image. We can do the same thing here, only we’re compressing time. After you’ve bagged your shot of the waterfall, look around the edges of the photograph and you see if the plants are soft and fuzzy. If they are, you have to play this mental gymnastics to switch into a sports mindset of shooting to freeze motion. You need something in the 1/100 or faster range. You can open up the aperture, but make sure you don’t loose your maximum focus. If that’s not enough light, you need to start boosting your ISO until you can achieve that shutter speed.

Back home, you take the two exposures and blend them back together using layer masks in Photoshop. I’ll save that topic for another blog post.

4. Head out when it’s cloudy

One way you can buy yourself some more camera time is to hike on overcast rainy days. You get all the benefits of shooting when the sun is low, with the freedom to shoot all day. I also find you get much better color when it’s overcast so things like mossy rocks or autumn leaves really pop.

One pitfall you need to avoid on cloudy days is including the sky. Depending on the waterfall, if you can get up high to shoot down on the falls, eliminating the sky from the shot, you will avoid getting a boring grey sky over your waterfall.

Like anything in photography, it takes practice and experimentation. Get out there and put some of these tips to practice. Please share some links to your latest shots in the comments.A Post By: Darren Rowse

While I’m not always a fan of sticking strictly to the ‘rules’ or ‘guidelines’ of photography I think they can be well worth knowing and keeping in the back of your mind as you shoot (whether it’s so you can follow them or break them for effect). Here’s four ‘rules’ for landscape photography that might be helpful for those just starting out (ie they’re not meant as a definitive guide but rather a starting point) :

1. Diagonal Lines

Using diagonal lines can be a very effective way of drawing the eye of those viewing an image into it and to the main focal point.

The ‘lines’ need not be actual lines – they could be the shape of a path, a line of trees, a fence, river or any other feature in an image.

Converging lines (two or more lines coming from different parts of an image to a single point) can be all the more effective.

Read more about using Diagonal Lines in your digital photography.

2. Geometric Shapes

By positioning key aspects of a landscape on points of a geometric shape you can help create a balanced composition. Perhaps the most common and easiest way to do this is to use a ‘triangle’ shape between objects in an image with three objects in a frame positioned with one to each side and one more central.

Using Geometric Shapes in this way isn’t something that I’ve done a lot of – but it is one technique to get balance in a shot and if you’re clever, to lead the eye into it (in a similar way to the diagonal lines rule above).

You can see this illustrated (to a point) in the photomontage image to the right.





3. The Rule of Thirds

The Rule of Thirds gets trotted out more often than any other in all types of photography and is one of the first rules of composition taught to most photography students. While sometimes it can feel a little cliche it can also be a very effective technique in landscapes (although keep in mind that breaking this (and other rules) can also produce dramatic and interesting shots).

Position key points of interest in a landscape on the intersecting point between imaginary ‘third’ points in an image and you’ll help give your image balance and help those focal points to really capture attention.

Read more about using the Rule of Thirds in composing your shots.

4. Framing Images

While adding points of interest to a foreground is an important technique for adding interest to landscape shots – a similar technique is to ‘frame’ the shot by adding interest to other parts of the edges of an image.

Perhaps the most common way of framing a landscape shot is to include an overhanging branch in the upper section of a shot. Similarly framing a shot with a bridge might work.

Read more about Framing Images

Rules are Made to Be Broken?

Of course while knowing the rules can be important – knowing when to use them and when to break them is a talent that great photographers generally have.

Practice these techniques – but don’t get so worked up about them that they kill the creativity that you have.

Let me finish with a quote about Rules of Photography from Photographer Edward Weston to help give us a little balance on the topic:

“To consult the rules of composition before making a picture is a little like consulting the law of gravitation before going for a walk. Such rules and laws are deduced from the accomplished fact; they are the products of reflection.”

Further Reading: 11 Surefire Tips for Improving Your Landscape Photography.A Post By: Elliot Hook

An important element of landscape photography is ensuring that all of the key elements within your composition are sharp. This can often include foreground objects that are a matter of meters from your camera as well as background elements that can be kilometres away. Therefore, to achieve this, you need to ensure your depth of field is large enough to render everything of interest, suitably sharp.

When you focus on an individual point within your landscape, you are in fact creating a plane of focus that lies parallel to the sensor. Everything in front of, and behind, that plane is technically not in focus, however there is a region within which objects will appear acceptably sharp – that is the depth of field. For instance, in the scene below the camera has been focussed on a rock. Therefore, the plane of focus lies parallel to the sensor across that rock and the limits of acceptable sharpness, that form the bounds of the depth of field, lie in front of, and behind, that plane.

In the diagram above, the depth of field is not sufficient to capture all of the trees within the range of acceptable sharpness, i.e. they will appear out of focus. However, the depth of field can be easily manipulated to extend as far as you wish as it is controlled by a number of factors, namely: focal length, aperture and distance to the focal point. (I’m not going to include sensor size here as, after the purchase of your camera, it is not subject to user control; however it does not hurt to appreciate that the depth of field is inversely proportional to sensor size meaning that different cameras have different capabilities with respect to achievable depth of field). The relationship that these factors have with depth of field is given below:

Focal length: Up first is focal length as, typically, your focal length will be determined by your composition. Changing your focal length will alter your field of view and therefore your composition, meaning that you don’t often adjust your focal length to alter your depth of field but generally manipulate the other factors at your chosen focal length. A short focal length, i.e. wide-angle, will give you a greater depth of field than a long focal length, i.e. telephoto.

Aperture: Probably the most obvious factor in depth of field control is aperture. A narrower aperture, i.e. larger f/ number, gives you a greater depth of field and vice-versa. It is important to select the smallest, diffraction-limited aperture so to obtain the maximum depth of field without suffering from image degradation.

Distance to focal point: In combination with a given focal length and aperture, deciding where to place that plane of focus will impact the resulting depth of field. The depth of field increases as the distance to the focal point from the camera increases. Therefore, once a focal length has been chosen, it is generally the combination of the selected aperture and distance to the focal point that controls the depth of field.

Hyperfocal Distance

One way to ensure that the entire frame is in focus (well, ‘acceptably sharp’) is to ensure that the depth of field extends from the foreground to infinity. To do this, you need to focus at the ‘hyperfocal distance’: for a given focal length and aperture, there will be a distance where setting your point of focus will result in the entire scene being within the depth of field.

So theoretically, by selecting the correct aperture and moving the point of focus to the hyperfocal distance (assuming the composition and therefore focal length remain unchanged) it would be possible to render the entire scene in focus. A point worth noting is that when focussing at the hyperfocal distance, the near acceptable limit is always half of the hyperfocal distance.

The calculation to determine the hyperfocal distance isn’t trivial, so there are numerous sites or apps to help you when out in the field. However by frequent application, it isn’t long until you gain an appreciation of where to set your point of focus, for a given aperture at your commonly used focal lengths.

Aperture Selection

For any focal plane, the depth of field extends 1/3rd in front and 2/3rd behind the point of focus. Therefore, an easy, but potentially flawed, application of hyperfocal focussing is to select a very small aperture, e.g. f/22 or f/18, and to focus 1/3rd of the way into the scene from the bottom of the frame. It’s not a bad assumption, as often you will achieve the desired depth of field, however in choosing such a small aperture, you may well be losing any benefits of infinite focus due to decreased image sharpness as a result of diffraction.

For example, the image below shows a comparison of the same scene, shot at f/8 (left) and f/16 (right).

The frosty fern leaf in the centre of the frame at the bottom of the image, was an important part of the foreground interest here. Even though both images look perfectly sharp, the 100% zoom for each image below shows the difference in sharpness for between using f/8 and f/16, even though both apertures result in a depth of field that extends from before the fern leaf to infinity:

Diffraction becomes an issue all lenses as the aperture gets smaller, especially at the edges of the image, and will be more pronounced on inexpensive lenses. Typically, the sweet spot, in terms of lens performance, will be somewhere between f/8 and f/11. Therefore, use of the smallest ‘diffraction limited’ aperture that can still achieve the required depth of field becomes important.

So, hopefully, you will see that it is worth being aware of the hyperfocal distance for your commonly used focal lengths, especially for the apertures that result in optimum lens performance. With the tools available to us today, it isn’t difficult to work it out, even when out in the field, so why not give it a go the next time you are out photographing landscapes.A Post By: Darren Rowse
overseas trip I received emails from two fellow travelers from the tour group I shared two weeks with as I toured around Turkey. Both emails contained some of the ‘best’ photos that my two fellow travelers. Many of the photos that each of them took were in the same locations (mainly landscape photography) and I was fascinated to compare them because despite being taken in the same location – many of them were remarkably different in terms of quality.

One of my fellow travelers consistently had taken better shots and one of the reasons for this was that he’d obviously given some thought to the foregrounds in his shots and used them to really add depth to the shots he’d taken. His shots made you feel like you were standing right in the scene itself. The foregrounds added context, perspective and interest.

On the other hand – my other friend had quite obviously given the foreground in his images little, if any, thought at all. The resulting images were one dimensional and lacked a way into the shots.

I’ve looked previously at factors to think about in the background of images and now I’d like to raise a few to consider with foregrounds:





1. Check your Foreground Before Hitting the Shutter Release

Ok – so this was the same point that I made in the background article but it applies here too (I promise the rest of the points in this post will be more unique). Before you hit the shutter always run your eye around the viewfinder (all of it).

Check your foreground for distracting elements but also move your camera around a little to see what you’re missing from your foreground that could ADD something to your shot. You see good foregrounds don’t just happen. Sometimes you have to search them out and make them happen.

2. Get Down Low

One of the strategies that many landscape photographers use when trying to accentuate their foreground is to lower the height that they take their image from. Crouch down and/or lower your tripod and you’ll find the perspective of your shots can be changed quite remarkably.

3. Raise your Horizon

Similarly when you change the positioning of the horizon you change the influence that a foreground has on the image. Most people naturally place horizons in the middle of a frame but as we’ve discussed previously they tend to do better along one of the horizontal ‘thirds lines’. If you place it on the bottom third line you tend to emphasize the sky in your shot – however when you put the horizon on the top third line you accentuate the foreground. Either can work of course – depending upon what’s going on in the sky or foreground but if you have an interesting foreground you’ll generally want a higher horizon.

4. Use Leading Lines

Another very effective strategy with foregrounds is to look for ‘leading lines’ that will draw the viewer’s eyes into your image. They’re usually vertical lines (sometimes with a diagonal direction) of some kind.

Leading lines could be actual lines but they might also be objects, patterns or shapes that create flow from the bottom edge of the imaged up into the main part of the frame.

5. Aperture

Depending upon the type of image and the effect that you’re after – you’ll probably want to use a reasonably small aperture (a larger number) in order to have a large depth of field. This will keep as much of the image in focus as possible (from your foreground and into the background).A Post By: Darren Rowse

I love cities. While I enjoy getting out into the wide open spaces of the countryside I am also a big fan of the hustle and bustle of inner city life. It’s not for everyone but I find that such areas are so interesting to spend time in – both on a personal level but also photographically.

Some people might be a little depressed by the greyness of concrete, towering skyscrapers and graffiti covered walls – but I find them full of photographic potential.

Urban Landscape Photography looks for these photographic possibilities in the cities and and urban areas where we live and work.

Urban Landscape photography is a little slippery to define as it sits between a number of other genres. For the purposes of this article let me contrast it with a few related photographic genres:

Cityscape Photography – urban landscapes go beyond the capturing of the big picture cityscape that is usually quote polished and clean.

– urban landscapes go beyond the capturing of the big picture cityscape that is usually quote polished and clean. Architectural Photography – urban landscapes are less interested in the building and it’s architectural style and more interested in what happens in and around it.

– urban landscapes are less interested in the building and it’s architectural style and more interested in what happens in and around it. Candid Street Photography – urban photography focussed more upon the city itself (and it’s life) than the people who live in it.

Urban Landscape photography is often gritty, it’s not always pretty and it can be quite abstract.

Following are 11 tips to help you improve your urban landscape photography:

1. Take a Variety of Lenses

I find that taking two lenses with me is usually enough for urban photography. I prefer to take one wide angle lens and a zoom with a fair bit of length to it. Longer focal lengths are useful for capturing the details of building and street scenes (be aware that they also tend to flatten pictures) but wide angle lenses are great for capturing the big picture and they tend to give a bigger depth of field which can add interest and a nice feel to your shots.





2. Other Gear to Take

The gear you take on an urban landscape shoot will of course reflect your own style of photography (and budget) but in addition to the above two lenses and DSLR I take a monopod (or tripod if I’m going to shoot into the evening), polarising filters, UV filters (for when I’m not using the polarisers), sling style camera bag (I use a Crumpler bag which I find gives me the access I need as well as being reasonably inconspicuous, spare batteries and I generally take my external flash with me (although I don’t use it as much for landscape shots – it’s there more if I find a good portrait opportunity).

3. Look for Contrasts

One of the things that I love about cities is the diversity that you can find there – both in terms of the people (it’s where all types come together) as well as visual diversity in the sites you’ll see there. Look for and capture the contrasts between architectural styles, building materials, colours etc and you’ll end up with some very interesting shots.

4. Regarding People

A constant challenge for urban landscape photographers is that cities are places where people naturally gather. There’s nothing wrong with people but in urban photographs they do tend to become the focal point of shots whether you want them to be or not. My thoughts on people in urban photography is that you either work with the fact that there are people in the shots and use them as a focal point or if possible they need to be eliminated from the shot – there’s not really too much middle ground. One way of eliminating people from shots is to shoot on weekends or after work hours. Ultimately when it comes to whether to include people in a shot or not I ask myself the questions ‘are they relevant to the shot?’ and ‘do they add or take away from the composition?’. If they add something – include them. If they distract – get rid of them.

5. Evidence of People

If you choose to take the approach of eliminating people from your shots they almost always still live in the shots by the things that they leave there. Urban landscapes don’t always include people directly but speak about the way we live (both good and bad). It can be very powerful to look for the evidence of people in a landscape and to feature this in your shots. In doing so you add layers of interest and make your photos more dynamic.

6. Research Your Locations

Urban landscape photography might seem like a pretty spontaneous thing (and at times it can be) but many of the most spectacular shots are a result of careful planning. It’s amazing how a location can change depending upon the time of day (as a result of angles of light especially) so scout out potential locations at different times of the day and consider returning to the same location over time to see what else it might offer. In terms of what time of day is ‘best’ to photograph – I’m not sure there is one but my personal preference is late afternoon or on days which are overcast but where it’d not too dark.

7. Look for Themes

While there is real diversity in urban areas there are also many recurring themes of life. For instance I recently saw one exhibition of urban landscapes that explored the places people lived in a city – it was a series of people’s home ranging from park benches, to converted warehouses, to old period homes. Seeing them side by side was quite powerful.

8. Look for Mirrors

Many buildings these days are built with highly reflective surfaces. These can both present themselves as an opportunity and a challenge. Some stunning effects can be achieved by shooting the reflections in such buildings – to find the perfect way to do this often means you need to try lots of angles to find the best reflection. If you want to eliminate the glare or unwanted reflections from mirrors or shiny windows it is worth investing in and using a polarising filter.

9. Shoot into the Evening

Cities change incredibly as evening comes and the lights go on. What can be a drab or featureless scene can quickly become something with a lot of character and mood. I enjoy shooting in the twilight zone between day and night as there is still light in the sky but you also get the impact of city lights.

10. Explore Different City Zones

One thing that fascinates me about cities is the differences in the feel and sites that you can witness from area to area. Within a block or two you can move from a business district or commercial zone to a gritty, run down industrial zone or a trendy inner city residential or shopping area. Many urban landscape photographers have a preference for one or more of these types of areas but if you’re just starting out it can be worth experimenting with exploring the possibilities that each of these areas can present you with. Keep in mind that not all areas of cities are always safe – sometimes for this reason it can be wise to shoot with others.

11. Finding the Urban in the Suburban or Rural

Perhaps I’ve been a little ‘city-centric’ with this post – but most of what I’ve written about can be explored in the suburbs of our cities and even smaller towns as really urban landscapes document and explore the places where people live and gather – bid or small.A Post By: Anne McKinnell

One of my favourite things to do when I travel is to go on a quest to find a body of water that has a reflection of a landmark.

Photographing a reflection creates a unique image of an often photographed subject by adding interest and depth to your photograph.

The next time you travel add these to your shot list and come home with a set of dynamic images to show off your trip.

City Lights at Twilight

When the sky is that cobalt blue colour before night arrives, and lights from nearby buildings reflect off the water, magic happens.

Take this example of a waterfront hotel on a summer evening when the marina in the foreground was full of boats. Just after sunset the coloured lights on the exterior of the hotel reflected off the cobalt blue water making a very energetic image.

Calm Lake in the Morning

When you get up early in the morning water on a lake will often be flat calm making a perfect reflection. Capturing a perfect reflection is harder than it sounds because any amount of wind at all will cause ripples and blur the surface of the water.

If you can find a lake in the mountains there will be a better chance of finding still waters in the morning. Your shot will be even better if the morning’s first rays light up the peaks of the mountain which is reflected in the lake.

When you scout your location, take a compass so you can find a subject in the west that will light up when the sun rises. Then put some water between you and that subject and you have the ingredients for a great shot.

The calm lake shot is a good opportunity to break the rule of thirds and go for perfect symmetry in your image. Put the horizon line in the middle of the frame and include the same amount of subject and reflection.

You want to avoid direct light on the water because that causes glare. The best situation is when you have a colourful object that is has direct light on it and that subject is reflected in water which is in the shade. Then the reflection will contain saturated colours and no glare.

Not So Calm Lake

Ripples in the water are not necessarily bad. It just produces a different effect. You can get this effect by waiting for the wind to come up a little or just by using a longer exposure which allows time for the water to move while the shutter is open. Either way it will create a more abstract feel by adding texture to the water.

The Ocean at Sunrise or Sunset

Obviously you will not get a perfect reflection when you photograph the ocean because the water is always moving. But it will still reflect the colour of the sky and if you get a sunrise or sunset with great colour you can multiply that effect by including the reflected light in your composition.

Birds

I love capturing perfect bird reflections. They can be hard to pull off because you need a number of things to come together to make the image work.

First, there can be no wind at all.

Second, you need great light (as always).

Third, you need a bird (ok that was pretty obvious but easier said than done).

To make this image of a woodstork I had to go back to the location before sunrise three mornings in a row before I got still water. Then I had to find a position first, remain very still, and hope a bird would come. If the bird is there first, and you try to approach, it doesn’t usually work out.

I like images where the bird is moving a bit so there are little ripples around its legs that define the surface of the water.





Reeds

Look for reeds or other grasses sticking out of the water that can make a great abstract image. If it were not for the lilly pads in this image, it might be hard to tell where the surface of the water is.

Just the Reflection

The subject receiving the direct light does not necessarily need to be in the frame. Interesting compositions can be found if you leave the main subject out of the frame and only include the reflection in the shot.

In this image of Half Dome in Yosemite National Park, the direct light falling on the dome was very harsh so I decided to leave it out of the frame and only include the reflection to create a more abstract impressionist feel.

To go even more abstract, find reflections of colourful subjects in rippled water. Don’t worry if you cannot identify what the main subject is.

This image is reflections from a stack of kayaks on a dock at a marina. The ripples are caused by fish swimming under the surface.





This image was made in New Hampshire during the very colourful display of fall foliage.

It was a windy day, so photographing the trees wasn’t working out very well. I decided to go for the abstract look by photographing the reflection of the trees in the water which was rippled from the high winds.





Tips

Remember your choices: the subject and its reflection; just the reflection; still water; and blurred water.

Direct light on water creates glare – you want the direct light to fall on your subject which is then reflected in water which is in the shade. If there is glare, you can use a polarizing filter to reduce or even remove it.

Try using a graduated neutral density filter. Usually the reflection is a couple of stops darker than the main subject so you can use a graduated neutral density filter to even things out. If you don’t’ have one, you can always try the digital equivalent in Lightroom or Photoshop. But remember the reflection part of the image should still be slightly darker. If you make it as bright as the main subject the image will not look right.

Use a low angle to maximize the amount of reflection in the frame.A Post By: Elliot Hook

Long exposure photography has become very popular in the last couple of years, getting a lot of coverage in landscape photography magazines and on photo sharing websites.

With the ever-increasing number of options for 10-stop neutral density (ND) filters on the market, there has never been a better time to give it a go.

However, taking photographs when using such high-density filters gives rise to a set of problems that you may not have previously considered, so this article is intended to give a few useful tips that I have picked up since starting my journey learning about long exposure photography.

First, a bit of Background…

A neutral density filter should be just that: neutral; blocking out light without leaving a colour cast on the resulting image. Each ‘stop’ of an ND filter reduces the amount of light entering the camera by a factor of 2, i.e.:

A fairly common 2-stop filter (often referred to as ‘ND4’) reduces the amount of light hitting the sensor by a factor of 4. A 3-stop (‘ND8’) filter by a factor of 8 and so on, until you get to 10-stops, when the light is being reduced by a factor of 1024, meaning that the shutter needs to be open for over 1000x longer than without the filter.

Whilst this is the reason that you get silky smooth water or clouds rushing across the sky, it is also the reason why your workflow will need to be adapted to overcome issues as a result of the huge reduction in light.

On to the Long Exposure Photography Tips…

Tip 1: Whilst a tripod is considered a baseline requirement for many landscape photographers, it is even more important when shooting with a 10-stop filter. Exposures can easily extend to greater than a couple of minutes, so it is vital that your tripod is as sturdy as can be. This typically means ensuring that the legs are stood on firm ground, the centre column is not extended and the strap is secured so not to catch the wind.

You will often read that people recommend hanging your camera bag from the tripod to add ballast weight, however I think that it can often act as a large sail and cause greater instability if windy, so I instead tend to place a beanbag (full of uncooked rice) on top of the camera to add extra weight, without significant additional surface area.

Tip 2: Given that the filter is incredibly dense, unless the conditions are really bright, there will not be enough light getting through to allow the autofocus to function. Therefore, it is best to compose and focus your shot without the filter, switch to manual focus and then carefully attach the filter. This way the lens will not hunt for focus when you press the shutter.

Tip 3: It is important to close the viewfinder shutter, or at least cover the viewfinder, to ensure accurate light metering (if shooting in an automatic exposure mode, such as aperture priority) and to prevent stray light from sneaking in during the exposure. I’m not sure how critical the second point is but given how much the auto-metering is affected by the open viewfinder, I no longer take the chance so ensure it is closed before taking my shot.

Tip 4: For exposures in excess of 60 seconds, you’ll need to be able to locate the ‘BULB’ mode of your camera. Switching to BULB enables you to open the shutter for as long as you choose, enabling really long exposures, meaning:

You will most likely need a remote shutter release cable so that you can lock the shutter open for a given period of time (it’s a good idea to attach the remote release to the tripod using Velcro during the exposure, again to stop it from catching the wind and swinging around).

You will most likely need a way of calculating how long to leave the shutter open for. In some cases, the maths is trivial (for example, if an exposure without the filter is ¼ s, when using a 10-stop filter it becomes 0.25 s x ~1000 = 250 s, 250 s / 60 = ~4 minutes) but in others it can be more difficult, and as the light conditions can change pretty quickly, a phone app (such as NDCalc for android/iOS) can come in very handy.

Tip 5: Choose the right conditions. Ideal conditions for long exposure photography are when there is dappled cloud and a strong wind (see Tip 1). If there are no clouds, or no wind, there will be nothing to add movement. I prefer to shoot around sunrise/sunset, as then the sun is low in the sky, increasing the contrast in the clouds, resulting in an exaggerated streaking effect in the final image.

Tip 6: Even at low ISO, super long exposures can introduce noise in the form of hot pixels. You may not be able to see these when viewing the results on the LCD screen of your camera, but when viewed at 100 % on your computer monitor, you may find a number of bright red/green/blue pixels in your image.

An effective way to remove them is to take an exposure of identical length, at the same ISO, with the lens cap on. The hot pixels will be identical in all shots, almost like a finger print of your sensor, so by replicating the exposure with the lens cap on, you will generate an entirely black image, with the same hot pixels, to subtract away from your chosen image during post-processing.

Tip 7: Some brands of filter are known to leave more of a colour cast on the final image. This is a great reason (one of many) to shoot in RAW, as the colour casts can often be corrected during post-processing. Sometimes, for particularly long exposures, it may just irreversibly compromise an image and, in those instances, a black and white conversion is often the best way to overcome it.

Tip 8: A long exposure does not make up for poor composition. In fact, the you will probably be even more frustrated at the resulting photograph given the additional effort required to take and process it.

To Conclude…

Whilst I have discussed quite a few additional points to consider when taking long exposures with high-density ND filters, you soon learn to adapt them into your own work pattern that becomes routine. I find that taking long exposures often requires more planning, thought and processing than with my other photography, however the results can be breathtaking and are often worth it.

If you have any additional tips or issues that I haven’t mentioned here, I’d love to hear them in the comments.

Also check out these 15 Fantastic Examples of Long Exposure Photography.A Post By: Natalie Denton (nee Johnson)

Rolling hills and vales, enchanting areas of woodland, rugged shorelines and a dappled spring meadow can all become the most obvious of subjects for the landscape shooter, often yielding strongly emotive and awe-inspiring results.

The recipe for success however is less obvious and so here at Digital Photography School we aim to provide a list of the most necessary ingredients for capturing that captivating landscape.

Step 1: Finding the perfect spot

To minimise petrol costs scouting out that prized location, do a little preparation work before you head off. Research nearby or far-flung locations online, in the library or at your local tourist information office to discover what has been captured and decide how you can better it. There is no shame in looking at the work of photographers who you admire or who inspire you, and attempting to learn from the work they’ve achieved.

You could also try looking under resources for hiking, camping, mountain climbing, biking and canal boating, as well as many other outdoor pursuits, as these are likely to highlight scenic areas of interest. Talk to other photographers in person or on forums for their advice about where to try and where to avoid. Once you’ve created a shortlist of must-see locations, take a trip out to judge its potential in the flesh.

Step 2: Getting the right light

A landscape can be transformed with the right light and depending on the size of your scene it’s likely you’ll be dependent on the one obvious light source: the sun. Many landscape photographers believe the best light comes with the early morning light; a window that lasts an hour so before and after sunrise. Others argue that sunset provides more vivacious colouring, whereas some declare winter sun to be the best for shooting during the middle hours of the day.

Whatever your preference, photograph with the light behind or to the side of you and be prepared to get their ahead of the ‘window’ to find the best position, program settings and wait for the show to start. With that in mind – pack a comfortable chair, flask of warm beverage and warm clothing. Revising sunrise and sunset times for that particular location can be of great benefit, particular if you have a great distance to travel.

Step 3: Creative compositions

A solitary field lacking compositional elements will arguably be a dull scene so compose your landscape as you would with any other subject; think about what is interesting to the viewer. Walk around the location to pick out points of interest and employ tactics such as the rule of thirds, symmetry or the golden ratio to compose your scene.

Pay attention to the geographical elements before you and how they intersect with each other, for example; the line of the horizon, the shape of a mountain or a lake, consider how much space lies before you before it intersects with the nearest line or shape, and determine where these elements should be positioned for maximum interest. Are there shadows, or reflections that you can exploit as main areas of interest? Consider some foreground interest to draw the viewer in, or incorporate a leading line; such as a path, river or railway track to guide the eye into the frame.

Before you shoot say to yourself ‘what interests me within this image?’, ‘Does this composition do anything for me?’ and ‘what are the main areas of interest here, and am I showing these at their best?’ Be objective if possible, just because you find something in the scene interesting, will someone else be able to relate to it enough to find it interesting? Finally, just because you are shooting a landscape, it doesn’t mean you are restricted to a landscape orientation – experiment!

Step 4: The ideal set up

Adjust your tripod to a height that offers the best perspective: too low and the scene can look flat, too high and the perspective on any foreground interest may become skewed. Attaching a carrier bag of rocks or even your backpack to the centre column is a good way of increasing rigidity in the likelihood that a sudden gust of wind may disturb your capture. If your tripod has a split level use this to ensure the composition is straight and secure the DSLR as tightly as possible.

Turn off your lens’ vibration reduction technology and set the camera’s ISO low to 100 or 200 for example. If you are confident shooting in manual consider using longer exposures, especially at dawn or dusk when the light is deemed. These lengthy exposures will blur the ebb and flow of the sea or trace the movement of a cloud in the sky, cultivating in an eerily ethereal or delicately moody frame. If the light is stronger or you are shooting in the middle of the day, you may want to consider using filters to cut down the light entering your lens to achieve these longer exposures.

Using Aperture Priority will lend the opportunity to play with depth of field; and for a crisp capture with a wide scope of the scene in focus use an aperture of between f11 to f22. If you fancy getting creative why not employ a wider aperture and create a shallower depth of field, concentrating on the foreground interest in particular? Revise captures using Playback by zooming in to ensure details crisp, colours are accurate and study the histogram to approve the exposure. It’s advisable to shoot in RAW if your device allows it and your memory card can accommodate it.

A Guest Contribution by Todd Sisson – author of our Landscape Photography and Landscape Photography Post Processing eBooks.

During the writing of Living Landscapes, I was forced to do some heavy thinking about how I approach creative landscape composition in the field. At this juncture, it is important to note that I avoid heavy thinking at all costs. Thinking truly is the hardest work, especially when you are attempting to simplify a process that is almost instinctual to you.

However, my fear of hard thinking is eclipsed by my fear of Editorial wrath, so I set aside a day, dusted off a tantric chants CD and retired to my sweat-lodge teepee for some quality time with sub-conscious me. Thirteen hours later I emerged, 12 kg lighter and armed with two revelations, the first; I approach landscape composition as a three step process. The second; my sub-conscious is a freaky place that is best avoided in the future.

Luckily for you, it is the brief overview of the first revelation that I shall share with you here today; the three component steps to creating a successful landscape image:

Choose a subject

Find the right light

Create a composition

Successful landscape images result from a combination of interesting subject matter, quality light and a strong composition. This particular image nicely illustrates the point that you don’t need towering mountain peaks, blazing sunsets and extraordinary foreground features to make a pleasing image.

Choosing a Great Subject

Not everything in nature is destined to make a great photo. It is our job as a photographer to sort the wheat from the chaff and identify subject matter that will translate beautifully into the two dimensional constraints of the photographic medium.

To my mind, the best landscape subjects convey visual themes such as ‘energy’, ‘grandeur’ and ‘tranquility’ to the viewer. Mountains, bodies of water and coastlines all make happy hunting grounds for photographers because, as viewers, we instinctively know how to interpret these scenes. We sub-consciously know that a snow covered mountain peak must be big, or that a wave crashing on rocks is imparting large amounts of energy, and we know, without thinking, that a reflection on a pond occurs only under calm conditions. In short, we can easily ‘read’ these types of photograph.

The best photographic subjects communicate multiple visual themes and have a very broad appeal as a result. To me this scene speaks of tranquility (reflections), natural change (Fall color and the building cloud cover) and stoicism (the lone tree clinging to life on the outer limits of it’s natural environment). You may ‘read’ this scene quite differently depending upon your outlook on life – for example, a hardcore environmentalist may see no more than an introduced species of tree clogging a lake that has been flooded by unsustainable farming practices in the lake’s headwaters. Photography, and life for that matter, is a very subjective affair…

You don’t need to travel to Nepal (or New Zealand, for that matter, to find great photographic fodder. Sure, it is lot easier to make interesting landscape images when surrounded by Tolkien-esque mountains but subjects don’t need to be grand in scale to make great images, they just need to be visually interesting. Learn to seek form, patterns or color in a scene and you may well find a subject from which to create a landscape image.

To me, this is a visually interesting image despite the absence of towering mountains, lightning bolts and grazing Unicorns. I was initially drawn by the beautiful evening pastels and the earth shadow (the blue line in the sky near the horizon) but I needed something to ‘anchor’ the shot. The strong geometric pattern and form of the Spaniard grass created a terrific foreground element for the composition. By getting low and getting close an ultrawide lens the grass gains ‘visual weight’ – compare it to the nearly identical grasses a couple of yards back.

Seek the Right Light

I would happily argue that great light is the single most important element in a successful landscape image. In fact, I dedicated a significant number of ePages in Living Landscapes to doing just that. Great light is truly transformative.

Fortunately, seeking great light doesn’t entail shooting only Ferrari-red sunsets. In fact, I will pull out the camera in almost any light if it complements a scene. The skill is learning to judge what constitutes the best possible lighting conditions for a given location – this is where you have to practice the art of observation and pre-visualization to judge how the sun will play out during the course of the day. I use digital tools to assist in this process, namely Focalware, which is a nifty little app that shows the arc of the sun and moon throughout the day with freakish accuracy.

Great light is transformative. In Living Landscapes I detail the many steps and decisions that led from the scouting shot on the left to several portfolio-grade images of this scene.

Create a Composition

Composition is where it all comes together artistically. You may have lined up an amazing subject and be blessed with a veritable pyrotechnics show in the sky but if you combine these in a dreary, sloppy and uninspiring composition all is wasted.

I personally divide landscape compositions into two broad (and absolutely unscientifically defined) categories;

Dynamic landscape compositions

Static landscape compositions

Dynamic compositions are the show ponies of the landscape photography world. They employ a suite of visual ploys to imbue an image with an almost 3-D feel and/or impart a sense of dynamic energy. Dynamic compositions used to be difficult to create in ye olde film days but the learning curve is vastly accelerated by the digital workflow and easy access to educational information such as this dPS blog post written by yours truly.

Show pony. Dynamic compositions employ techniques such as leading lines, motion blur and vivid colors to draw the viewer’s attention into the frame.

Static compositions subscribe to a more traditional photographic aesthetic and, I feel, are more faithful to the two-dimensional constraints of the art form – most of Ansel Adams’ images would be considered static as opposed to dynamic compositions. I have a personal preference for beautifully executed static compositions – probably because I am fairly ancient, in internet years at least…

Static compositions rely upon a more subtle repertoire of visual techniques to achieve a sense of drama. Successful static compositions use a combination of layers, contrast, texture, form, localized lighting and color to engage the viewer.

No place for show ponies. Static compositions such as this rely upon layers of visual interest, form and spot lighting to succeed.

Mixing it Up

It is important to note that there is no particular order for executing these three steps. I will often stumble across great light (always it seems when driving with a car full of tired & hungry kids ) and then have to find a subject and a composition to capitalize upon the situation. This is, of course, where strong craft and technical skills kick in – readers of Living Landscapes will know that I promote a policy of keeping it simple with regards to camera settings and technical considerations, this allows me to work fast and seek out compositions – even while being bombarded with requests for snacks from the back seat!

Todd & Sarah Sisson are full-time landscape photographers based in Central Otago New Zealand.

Their work can be found as fine art prints & canvas prints at www.sisson.co.nz They can be found on Facebook, Google Plus and Twitter.A Post By: Darren Rowse

Most Pro landscape photographers recommend shooting either at (or around) dawn or dusk in order to capture their scene in the ‘golden hours’ when the light is at it’s best (in fact some will rarely shoot at any other time of day).

However, one of the problems associated with shooting at this time of day is that while the sky will often have enough light in it the foreground of your images can sometimes end up being a little underexposed and featureless.

One way to get around underexposed foregrounds is to include water in that area of your shot and to get it reflecting light from the sky.

This is a particularly effective technique at sunrise or sunset when there’s color and interesting cloud formations in the sky (and reflections in the water).

It may take a little experimentation with different positions to shoot from in order to get the right part of the sky in the reflections but with a little trial and error the effect can be quite stunning and a much brighter and more balanced image.

Even if you don’t get perfect reflections the light coming from the water can help balance the shot and help you overcome underexposed foregrounds.A Post By: Natalie Denton (nee Johnson)

Capturing scenes in low light remains one of the most challenging aspects of photography, yet the results when executed well can be truly captivating. Whether it’s an energetic cityscape or ethereal seascape the possibilities are endless. Here are a few essentials points to consider before you begin.

It’s a good idea to formulate a plan of attack before the twilight hour so scout out a position while there is another available light and grab a few set up shots to make sure your scene works and will be free from distracting objects. Cityscapes are best viewed from a distance, whereas seascapes are more dramatic nearer to the shoreline. Consider compositional elements to add scale, interest and context. When twilight occurs you’ll only have around 20-30 minutes of optimum shooting time so be ready for all eventualities. The best time to shoot a low light scene starts just half an hour before the sunsets until an half an hour or so after wards as this will produce beautiful colouration in the sky; resonating in a display of pinks, purples, reds, oranges eventually fading into an enigmatic blue. This shade of sky is more useful than the night sky as exposure times can be reduced if and helps to define the subjects within the scene. The key to flawless low light shots is long exposure which means slow shutter speeds so a sturdy tripod is unquestionably your most vital accessory. Manfrotto and Gitzo produce solid but light products which are ideal for landscape shooters. However, the ever portable and incredibly flexible gorillapod can be a great boon when creative angles or positions are desired. By supporting your camera you will be able to lower the sensitivity and decrease noise but leave the shutter open for as long as necessary without the worry of blur. If you are without a tripod but can’t resist a capture then look around for some other form of support, be it the top of a wall, the top of a rubbish bin, a fence, the ground, your rucksack or even your shoe – there are many ways to get around this problem. If there are literally no objects to support your kit from underneath, try leaning against a building or strong structure instead and press the camera into it and support it as calmly as possible with your hand underneath. So start by setting your camera upon a solid tripod and switching the unit to manual or shutter priority if you are wish. Lower the ISO to 100 (for some DSLRs you may need to access a sub menu to find this value) and dial in a shutter speed of 15 to 20 seconds (this will take some trial and error to find the optimum value). In terms of aperture you are going to want capture a longer depth of field to ensure far off elements within your scene remain in focus so try varying from f9 to f14. In relation to lenses the faster the better and a healthy wide angle will draw the whole scene in, something like a 12-24mm or a 10.5 fisheye can produce exciting results. However a zoom lens can be of benefit when shooting a city scene to pull in sections of the skyline or play with perspective. Using an auto white balance may result in lack lustre colours so set your white balance manually or dial in 5500k, as this is the average colour of daylight. It is advisable to shoot in RAW however as you can always alter the WB in processing if needed.

Another key piece of kit is a remote control shutter release like Nikon’s ML-L3 wireless control which works with Nikon’s enthusiast range of cameras; D40, D40x, D60, D80 and D90. There are many varieties of release out there for all makes and models; some wireless others tethered. The benefit of a remote shutter release is the photographer can ensure they do not accidental nudge the camera during it’s exposure as this would show on the capture as shake or blur, distorting the overall crispness and clarity. Another trick to employ if you are without a remote shutter is to use the self timer. If you do have a trigger release take this practice a step further by employing the camera’s bulb setting and mirror lock up functionality. First press the trigger to lock the mirror out of the way and wait for any residual vibrations to subside then press the trigger again to start the exposure but hold it down for as long as you want the capture to last. Camera manufacturers are stepping up their game all the time pushing DSLR technology to the limits, most recently and perhaps notably is Nikon’s D3S which is capable of shooting at ISO 200 to an impressive 12,800. Further still this ISO can be expanded to an unprecedented 102,400. By utilising higher ISOs such as this photographers can sample low light photography hand held as the shutter speeds can be sufficiently increased. Although powerhouses such as the D3S cope admirably with noise, the same cannot be said of all cameras. Therefore if you do opt for a High ISO instead or supporting the unit with a tripod noise is inevitably. However there are ways to reduce the effect. First your device may offer a Noise Reduction system, activate this and the camera will automatically search for the incorrect coloured pixels within your scene and map the correct the values instead. This isn’t the best idea by any means but is an option if handheld shooting is the only option available. There are many Noise reduction software products available on the market that can resolve this issue post capture as well and if processing in Photoshop opt to process as a 16-bit file rather than an 8-bit one as you’ll retain more image information which will extend the opportunity to recover shadows from burnt highlights and retrieve details from the shadows – both a hazard of low light shooting. Incorporate a foreground element to add interest, scale and to help contextualise the piece. For example the combination of natural and artificial light can be very dramatic in cityscapes, high levels of light pollution colour the night sky and the vast quantity of glowing orbs scatter light across the scene but including a bridge, highway or structure will help to lead the viewer into the frame. If it’s a twilight landscape you desire consider a diagonal row of trees, a fence, a hedge or farm house. Likewise with a sea scene incorporate a lighthouse, Cliffside or groyn. With so much or so little going on in your low light scene in can be a job to know where to meter from so set your camera to matrix or multi-segment metering and take several readings using the elements in your scene to judge the optimal value. Ideally it’s best to start with a midtone rather than highlights or shadows and if you are using a zoom lens, scroll in to meter from the detail of the subject or object and then zoom back out to compose the shot. Another handy trick some low light enthusiasts employ is exposure bracketing. Use Aperture priority and meter from one area of the scene (later repeat this for the various elements in turn). Dial in the exposure and use the histogram to ensure accurate results. Keep aperture and ISO consistent throughout but vary the length of the exposure in half a stop increments. Later you can package these into one shot in editing. The wonderful thing about digital is the instant feedback. A lot of your technique will be trial and error in the beginning but use the histogram to check exposure. It may indicate that part of the shot is overexposed but this may be the areas of bright lights in a city scene for example and is therefore perfectly fine. Ideally your frame will present a post sunset sky or veil of blue twilight but still offer detail in buildings on foreground instruments. The most important thing is to have fun and experiment!

Natalie Johnson is the former editor of Digital Photographer magazine and after seven years in the business has chosen to pursue her dream of becoming a freelance photographer and writer.A Post By: Eric Leslie

Hands down, the number one question I get is how to make better landscape images. Many fall into the new-gear trap thinking that when I upgrade to some new DSLR then I’ll be able to take better pictures. They buy the gear and suddenly the wind drops from their sails and their images still lack impact. So let’s talk about some things you can do to make your landscape photos pop.

1. Fanatically Chase the Best Light

What is good light you say? There is really no such thing as bad light, but it’s hard to create images with impact during the middle of the day when the sun is high. Midday the sun is harsh and it washes out colors and texture with heavy dark shadows.

The best time to get out and shoot everyday is when the sun is low in the sky because it creates more interesting side lighting that gives the subject more depth and scale. The light is much warmer creating softer highlights with better texture detail. This low warm light is also near sunrise and sunset and those are obvious times to add amazing colors to a landscape.

Another great place to look for amazing light is at the edges of storms. When a storm is passing through, the clouds can break up allowing the sun to peek through creating very dramatic scenes with well lit foregrounds against a dark sky. The air is clear and the ground is wet reflecting more of the colorful light from the sun. These kinds of storms move quickly and the light can change in a moment, so you have to be ready.

Shooting during off hours of the day is tough because those are very anti-social times. The first part of the day just after sunrise is really early and most of us still have to work five days a week. In the evening, the best light is going down right when dinner is served and it’s hard to leave your family behind and return to eat your dinner cold.

2. Don’t be Lazy

Getting good light in a landscape shot is the same difference between shooting a model with and without makeup. You have to work to get to these locations early in the morning and late in evening. At sunrise, that means hiking out in the dark to get on location to catch sunrise. That means flash lights, an extra layer of clothing and a stiff brew of coffee to keep you awake through the wee hours of the morning.

Patience is also key. You might be hiking during the day and find the best view looking down Yosemite Valley but it’s midday and the light sucks. To get this shot you need the fortitude to sit there half the day for the sun to get low and possibly put up a nice sunset for you. The light may not do what you want, so are you willing to stay another day to try again? If you do, your shot won’t be just another Tunnel View.

3. Know Your Landscapes

There is this odd grass is greener somewhere else mindset all of us fall into. We believe we have to travel somewhere to get a great landscape shot. The truth is, you know your area like the back of your hand and if you don’t, get in your car and explore. A vast majority of my best images were all taken within 75 miles of my home. Keep in mind that the whole world doesn’t get to look at your countryside daily. So when it’s boring and repetitive for you, it’s always new and exciting for your admirers.

When you do travel, do your research before you get there. Google Earth is my number one go-to app for researching locations. You can go a step further and use The Photographers Ephemeris which plots where the sun and moon will rise and set. This is a lifesaver for knowing when the sun will hit a peak and from what angle. I can find out when the sun will go down behind a ridgeline to shoot a waterfall. Being armed with this research will dramatically boost the number of keepers and and your fans will think you’re a rockstar.

4. Don’t be a Chicken

Have you ever gotten to an awesome landscape and failed to get the shot because you didn’t cross a creek or you didn’t want to lay down in the mud to get an awesome new perspective. Often times changing our point of view can completely change a composition. I’m not suggesting you do anything dangerous, only you try pushing yourself beyond your typical comfort zone to really work for that shot. When I shoot moving water, inevitably, you will find me standing in the middle of the creek so I pack waders with me to stay dry.

Perhaps to get a clear view of a rainbow you need to get down on the ground and lay in some mud to see around some brush. If you have a fear of the dark, make steps to work past that fear so you can stay out past blue hour and not be afraid to walk back to your car in the dark with a flashlight. Perhaps the mosquitoes are acting like Africanized Bees. Be prepared with bug spray and swat a few so you can get the shot regardless. Landscape photography is often uncomfortable, slightly dangerous and downright boring, but if you’re willing to work past these challenges, the results will create incredible impact.

5. Use Different Focal Lengths

For most people, when they think of a landscape, they think of big expanses shot using a wide-angle lense. Try something different by shooting with longer focal lengths. This allows you to really focus in on specific details. You can see past all the distractions and you get to give the best part of the scene the whole stage.

Wide-angle tends to make distant objects like mountain peaks feel distant and small. Telephotos will bring that peak in close and will compress all the objects together making them feel bigger and giving them a much greater impact.

You can still get great impact shooting wide. Many incorrectly believe that wide angle lenses are good for “getting it all in”. The opposite is true. Since you can get more in the shot, it allows you to get much closer to the subject filling the frame with more of what you want having fewer distractions.

Final Words

If you struggle with creating dull and insignificant images, the recurring theme through all of these tips is simply to do something new that you’re aren’t doing now. Growing your craft is not a 5-step checklist, it’s a process that takes time. Get out of your computer chair and experiment, keep making mistakes, and don’t forget to have fun! For me each new image is the thrill of the hunt. I love to seek the unknown and share it with the world. Images created by overcoming the biggest hurdles with the most blood, sweat and tears always move people the most.

One of my favourite places to shoot is the coast due to its variety and ease of access. I’m fortunate to live in a country such as New Zealand which has an abundance of beaches, even in a big city like Auckland. Here are some tips on how to capture beautiful photos at the beach.

Composition

Like all landscapes, including some foreground interest is important in order to produce an interesting photo. One way to do this at a beach is to look for interesting rocks or rock formations and use those as your foreground interest. However don’t just find a rock and stick it randomly in your photo – try and find some sort of pattern or structure to lead the viewer into the shot. Experiment with different points of view – e.g. try placing the camera at different heights and angles – to see what works best.

Below is a shot with the camera about chest height and pointing down to accentuate the shape of the rock pool. Having the camera lower would have ‘flattened out’ the rock pool, and having the camera higher would restrict the amount of sky I could have included.

Here I found some old tree roots that I found really interesting. I got the camera low down and very close to the foreground to take this shot, using a wide angle lens to exaggerate the tree roots.

Some beaches offer great views from the cliffs above and these can make for some great shots. Including large rock formations or cliff faces in the foreground really work well for these types of shots. The below shot was taken above a gannet colony, and I found the inclusion of the gannets nesting on the rocks also gives a sense of scale.

Sometimes it’s best to keep things simple. Wet sand can offer gorgeous reflections and this is best with an outgoing tide as there are fewer footprints to worry about.

Of course, that’s not an exhaustive list of the types of shots you can get near the sea. One of the main reasons I love seascapes is just the variety you can get from different beaches. Or even the same beach at different tides.

And don’t be afraid to get your feet wet. Sometimes the best compositions are those taken from in the water!

Shutter Speed

Another important factor to consider with seascapes, or any photos containing water, is shutter speed, as this often has a significant impact on the overall look of your photo.

A faster shutter speed will freeze the action and will therefore show the water without any motion blur. Depending on how fast the water is moving, this is typically anything from 1/20 sec and faster. This is the most realistic way to capture water and would be what non-photographers would expect to see. But we know photography isn’t always about realism!

The below photo was taken at 1/50 sec and as you can see this was fast enough to freeze the movement of the water.

Slower shutter speeds will blur the water to varying degrees. Again it depends on how fast the water is moving, but I find that shutter speeds of around 1/2 sec will show some motion blur while still retaining a reasonable amount of detail of the water. This shot was taken at 1/3 sec and captured the splash of the water against the rocks while still getting some motion blur.

Once the shutter speed goes above 1 second the water starts to give the foggy/milky effect that is quite popular. Although some people dislike this effect, I love using it in my photos. The below shot was taken using a shutter speed of 4 seconds.

The shutter speed you choose is usually down to personal preference. Sometimes it’s dictated by the light (e.g. before sunrise or after sunset the light is too low to use a fast shutter speed) but often it depends on how you want the photo to look. I find it’s also a case of trial and error, so don’t be afraid to mix it up a little and experiment.



Filters

The two types of I filters I commonly use for seascapes are graduated neutral density (GND) and neutral density (ND) filters.

GND filters are used when the dynamic range of a scene to too much for the camera’s sensor. This is often the case at sunrise and sunset when the sky is much brighter than the foreground. A GND filter is dark at one end and clear at the other end, with a gradual transition in between. The dark end is placed over the brighter part of the scene (e.g. the sky) so that the exposure is balanced with the brighter part (e.g. the foreground). An alternative to using a GND filter is to take multiple exposures and blend them together with post-post- processing but I prefer to get it in one shot where possible.

ND filters are used to reduce the amount of light hitting the camera’s sensor. They are useful when you want to use a longer shutter speed than the light would normally allow. ND filters come in different strengths, commonly around 3-stops (reducing light by 8 times) but can go all the way to 10-stops (reducing the light by 1024 times).

The below shot was taken using a 10-stop ND filter. The sun was just rising above the horizon so conditions were quite bright, but the filter allowed me to use a shutter speed of 60 seconds.

See my other DPS article for more information on using strong ND filters.

I hope you found this tutorial useful. You can view more of my photos on my website, on my Flickr page, or on Facebook.A Post By: Elliot Hook

Composition is often the key to the difference between a good landscape photograph and a great landscape photograph. There are oft quoted rules that we all try to adhere to and break in equal measure (rule of thirds, leading lines, golden spiral etc.) yet when considering what we are trying to capture within the frame, we don’t always consider the frame itself.

The aspect ratio of the photograph can make or break the composition by both emphasising the subject and removing distractions, or by putting the whole scene off-balance. When looking through the viewfinder, about to press the shutter, it’s a good idea to try and envisage the final shot, including the aspect ratio, in order to optimise your composition (too often the aspect ratio is an after-thought, being edited and applied during post-processing to correct for poor compositional choice).

But how does each aspect ratio impact our composition? Hopefully, that’s where this article comes in. I’m going to discuss a few common aspect ratios, with examples, and show the benefits and draw backs for each, considering where each one may be applied.

(Note, there is an argument for cropping your photo without sticking to a defined ratio to give an image a custom ratio based on your subject matter. I believe that can make printing/framing awkward so will therefore be sticking to well-defined ratios that most should be familiar with).

1:1 –Square format

The square format can often be used to simplify an image and give a subject a striking presence at the centre of the frame. By keeping the width equal to the height, the way in which we read the photograph changes, as there is less of a need to move left-to-right through the frame. The square format lends a good opportunity to break the rules we so often follow – place the horizon along the centre of the image or place a subject in centre of the frame, and the composition may only get stronger. You’ll often see a 1:1 aspect ratio used to emphasise minimalism (again, along the theme of simplification).

4:3 – Four-thirds format

This format is the default aspect ratio of cameras that use four-thirds sensors. The image is wider than it is tall, meaning that the eye naturally wants to move left-to-right through the image. However, given that the image is still fairly tall, in relation to the width, this ratio is perfect for leading the eye into the scene through leading lines from foreground interest. The relative height of the image encourages the use of wide-angle focal lengths to capture the depth of a scene within an image, without capturing excess details at the edge of each frame.

6:4 – 35 mm format (also called 3:2)

This is the default aspect ratio for 35 mm film, and therefore for full frame and APS-C sensors used in most Nikon/Canon cameras. The width of the image is significantly wider than the height that, again, encourages reading through the image from left-to-right, meaning diagonal leading lines can work a treat. A limitation of this aspect ratio is that the height is that much shorter in relation to the width, meaning that capturing foreground detail using a wide-angle lens becomes more difficult due to the limited vertical space with which to work. It can cause the subjects within the frame to become too disparate and therefore lose impact. The 6:4 ratio can however be a format that is suited to capturing scenes where there is little to no foreground interest, with mid-range focal lengths (e.g. 35 mm).

16:9 – widescreen panoramic

This format was supported in film by the advanced photo system (APS) on its introduction and has recently become more popular due to the prevalence of 16:9 aspect ratio displays in the home – tvs, computer monitors, mobile devices. With this format, the width of the image is dominant, meaning leading the viewer in from the foreground is difficult, but the format is ideally suited to presenting portions of landscape scenes captured with longer focal lengths (i.e. zoom lenses) from a distance.

12:6 or 18:6 – panoramic (also called 2:1 or 3:1)

I’ve chosen to adopt 12:6 or 18:6 as the panoramic format here for a few reasons. Both 2:1 and 3:1 seem to be fairly well supported in that panoramic picture frame options are typically either 2:1 or 3:1. 2:1 is a panoramic format supported by a number of medium format film cameras and 3:1 was supported by the APS. Typically, panoramic ratios will be used to present the result of stitching 2 or more images together – it’s quite challenging to capture a 3:1 aspect ratio image from one frame and it sill be large enough to print at any meaningful size – and often frames to be stitched will have been captured using a longer focal length in order to pick out details distant in the landscape. There is no real option of including foreground detail here.

‘Portrait’ mode

I’m aware that I’ve discussed a number of different aspect ratios in the ‘landscape’ format and not in ‘portrait’ format. That is because I believe the options for successful presentation of landscapes in ‘portrait’ format to be much fewer in number. For a landscape to work, you need to balance the composition throughout a frame and aspect ratios such as 6;4 make that very difficult due to the image being too tall, relative to its width. For ‘portrait’ landscapes to work, fatter rectangles such as 4:3, 7:6 or 5:4 are ideal, 5:4 being heavily used by professional landscape photographers using medium and large format cameras. These formats allow the eye to be taken through an image, still from-left-to-right, without having an excess amount of sky putting the frame off-balance.

Conclusion

Whilst I have tried to describe specific uses to certain aspect ratios, I am aware that not all scenes will follow the suggestions I’ve made, and some images may well work in one ratio, not another, contrary to what I’ve suggested.

However, I’m hoping this introduction to aspect ratios will encourage you to think about them when composing your shot, before pressing the shutter. It isn’t always ideal to fill the frame of your camera with the landscape in front of you, and knowing that the aspect ratio you choose is not dictated by which camera you use means you may be able to use them effectively to boost the impact of your landscape photographs.A Post By: Darlene Hildebrandt

HDR is a bit of a buzz word in photography in the last while and there is much debate about it, whether it’s good or bad, appropriate or not, or even real photography or not. Even right here on Digital Photography School, you can find articles for, and against, doing HDR. I’m not going to get into any of that today, I’m just going to speak to those of you that do enjoy doing it and would like some tips for doing HDR sunsets, which is one of the toughest subjects to handle with this technique. So if you are anti HDR, just carry on, or perhaps this may sway you a little to want to try it.

HDR or High Dynamic Range, why it’s great for sunsets

When we talk about a scene having a High Dynamic Range, it simply means that there is wide range of contrast from the darkest area, to the brightest area. Sunsets exemplify that because we are usually shooting into the sun, a bright light source, and the landscape is often so dark it’s in a silhouette. By shooting correctly and processing well you can achieve a result that has detail in both those areas.

Tips for shooting the right images

There are a few things you need to get right in camera when you’re at the scene so follow these tips.

Make sure to bracket your images far enough on both ends of the exposure scale , but dark enough and bright enough. What I mean by that is your darkest image should have a gap on the histogram to the right side (meaning there are no white areas, and no blinkies on your camera display) and your brightest image should have a gap on the histgram’s left edge (there are no black areas)

shoot raw files, they will give you the most amount of data to work with

bracket your images 2 stops apart, because assuming you followed the tip above and have shot raw files, they carry plenty of data at least 2 stops either direction so shooting 1 stop apart will cause you to shoot more images than you need and just end up bogging down your computer in processing, OR you won’t shoot enough range

shoot at low ISO, ideally 100. HDR processing introduces a lot of noise into your image so start with a lower ISO to minimize that problem.

use a tripod as your shutter speeds will likely be fairly slow, and it also allows you to get all your bracketed shots perfectly aligned for a sharper final image. For the image above my settings are: ISO 400 (I did that because the light was fading fast and I wanted to shoot a bit faster), f8 at 1/1000, 1/250, 1/60, and 1/15th of a second

use a remote trigger (cable release) to fire the camera, so you aren’t touching it during the exposures to reduce camera shake and a blurry image

change only the shutter speed, NEVER the aperture. If you change the aperture in your bracketed images you are changing the focus from one to the next and your resulting blended HDR image will likely have some odd focus issues or halos.

This is what your bracketed set should look like. Good coverage on both the dark and light ends of the light scale. Notice the darkest image has lots of nice colour in the sky, whereas the brightest one has a ton of detail in the foreground area but none in the sky. This is normal, and exactly what you want.

Tips for processing the bracketed images

I use Photomatix as my HDR tone mapping software of touch. I find it gives me the flexibility to be able to produce both natural looking and surreal results. Whatever software you use for your tone mapping, try some of these tips for better sunset results:

if there are moving clouds in the scene or trees blowing, use the software’s deghosting feature to remove of minimize those. It will make the final result look much sharper.

when adjusting the tones in your software of choice keep your saturation settings low, don’t overdo it. In Photomatix I always (let me repeat that word), ALWAYS, keep my saturation under 50! When I pull it back into Lightroom afterwards and punch my blacks and contrast up the saturation increases with it, so it’s really easy to take it too far.

watch the sky for halos (white areas glowing around the edges of things) especially if the sky cloud free against something dark like a tree or building. Halos are generally an affect that is thought of as poorly done HDR and why many people do not like the technique. Sure you can create a surreal look but I do think you can take it too far. Just as an example, here’s what “too far” looks like in my opinion. Do NOT make something that looks like this. Notice the extreme noise and graininess in the sky? This is caused by pushing too far.

Often when shooting a landscape in HDR you’ll find that one area looks good if you push it a little further, but the other half doesn’t. Such is the case here. I find that I can push the land and foreground area a bit further to get more detail out, but then the sky looks bad or has halos. So you can mask back in one image of the sky if necessary, or blend the two together using Photoshop and pick which areas are best from each version. See below for an example. Version #1 processed for a nicely blended sky.

The final version above is #1 and 2 above blended together using layers and masks in Photoshop. Notice how it takes the best of both images and combines them.

HDR sunset with a person?

Let’s look at another example. Some people say you can’t do HDR when you have a person in the shot. Can you? Take a look at the images below and you tell me if it works or not.

There has been no image blending on this final version, just tone mapped and tweaked in Lightroom. I do confess though that this is not sunset, it is in fact a sunrise. But you get the idea, it’s the same because the sun is on the horizon in both cases.

How to handle a sky with lots of fluffy clouds

Another common problem when doing HDR for landscapes is when there are lots of big white fluffy clouds, they often tend to come out looking rather dark and foreboding. This is another good time to use the masking technique. In the images below I’ve processed the HDR how I like it for the foreground, nice and crisp. But my clouds have gone too dark. If I choose to pull back on the surreal look I lose that nice detail in the grass and pyramids. So I’ve taken the best of both and combined them once again.

Version #1 above, processed for detail in the grass, but notice how dark the clouds are. They were not storm clouds but they sure look like it now. I want to get those soft fluffy ones back so I took one of the original single images from my bracketed series and combined it with this one to get the following final image which I think is much softer looking.

Final blended version above. See the difference? It’s subtle but I think it makes a huge difference to the final appearance and feel of the image.

Summary and action plan

So where to go from here is to get out and try this for yourself. If you have some bracketed series that you’ve already shot you can go back and try processing them with these tips and see if it makes a difference. Or better yet, get out there and go shoot tonight’s sunset or tomorrow’s sunrise if you’re a morning person.

One other unrelated tip I’ll leave you to get better sunsets in general is to find an interesting subject in front of your sunset. Notice in these cases I have a great scene or something with a great foreground or shape (pyramids) to add some interest to the scene. A plain old sunset on a flat horizon is really not that interesting no matter how great the colours are. So find a suitable scene during the daytime and come back at dusk and work your magic on it.

If you want some other HDR tips you can read 10 Tips on how to do HDR photos without a tripod, for those times when you don’t have one with you, or you aren’t allowed to use it.

Have you got other little secrets or tips for creating HDR sunsets? I’d love it if you shared with in the comments below and as always if you have a question please ask as I read and answer ALL the comments.A Post By: Elliot Hook

A key aspect of successful landscape photography is image sharpness. Usually, it is desirable to ensure that all elements of a scene, whether close or far, are captured in sharp focus. This can prove to be challenging and, if not achieved with the click of the shutter, cannot be corrected later during post processing.

One approach that is often taken is to use the smallest aperture available, e.g. f/22, to obtain the largest depth of field. Whilst maximising the depth of field is a good intent, using such a small aperture will actually result in softer images due to an effect known as diffraction.

Most lenses are at their sharpest when used at apertures between f/8 and f/11 and whilst hypefocal focussing may allow you to capture an entire scene acceptably sharp in one image using these apertures; it is always still a compromise between a number of factors and there will be times when you cannot generate enough depth of field to capture a whole scene at optimum sharpness.

That is where focus stacking comes in.

Focus stacking is the technique of stacking (or blending) a number of images that have been focussed at different points throughout a scene to give a final image that contains the sharpest portions of the originals, seamlessly blended into one. It isn’t as laborious as it sounds and can give really good results, rendering scenes far sharper than possible in just one exposure.

In the field…

As you will be stacking the images into one, aside from the point of focus, you want the individual photographs to be identical in all other respects. Therefore, it is best to have the camera positioned on a tripod and use a remote release.

Using your optimum aperture (can easily be determined for a given camera/lens combo using focus charts, however you will most likely find that f/8 is a good starting point), take the required number of images focussed at different points throughout the frame.

A minimum of two images are required, i.e. one focussed for the foreground and one focussed for the background, however an additional third image, focussed for the middle ground can also be a good idea.

Back at home…

Open the two images in Photoshop and create a new file that contains both images as different layers, in the one file (to make life easier, name the layers accordingly, e.g. near, far).

Select both layers and go to Edit > Auto-Align Layers to ensure both images overlay perfectly. Select the ‘Auto’ option, and deselect the ‘Vignette Removal’ and ‘Geometric Distortion’ options.

Then select Edit > Auto-Blend Layers, and choose ‘Stack Images’, ensuring ’Seamless Tones and Colours’ is selected.

At this point, Photoshop will determine the sharpest portions of each image to incorporate into the final image, and apply a mask to each layer. Below you can see the layer masks applied to the two images. In this instance, you can see the rocks in the lower portion of the image are the main area selected by the layer mask for the ‘near’ layer whereas the rocks in the middle distance and the background mountains are incorporated from the ‘far’ layer.

It is worth checking the image at 100% zoom to ensure that there are no strange artefacts caused by poor blending of any moving grasses or branches. These can be fixed by manually painting white or black on to the relevant layer mask (remember: white reveals, black conceals). For those using Elements, if you are only using 2 or 3 images, it is possible to do the blend manually using layer masks and white/black gradients. In some instances, it actually gives better results, with fewer ‘blending artefacts’ to do the blend manually.

Once you are happy with the blend, merge the layers to give your final, focus stacked image.

It may not be immediately apparent when showing images at web resolutions, but the difference in the overall sharpness when using optimum apertures and focus stacking is astounding when printing images. To be able to focus stack, it only takes a little more forethought when out capturing the scene, and a few short processing steps when back at your computer so why not give it a go the next time you are out photographing landscapes.A Post By: Steve Berardi

When you think about landscape photography, you might immediately think of the wide angle zoom lens, which is great for capturing those expansive landscapes and “taking it all in.”

But, a telephoto zoom lens can also be helpful when photographing landscapes. To understand why, it’s important to know what determines perspective and how perspective can help convey a particular feeling in a photograph.

What determines perspective?

As Ansel Adams repeats so often in his wonderful book, The Camera: “perspective is a function of camera-to-subject distance.”

There’s a common misconception that perspective is determined by focal length, but in reality, the only thing that determines perspective is where you put the camera.

There are at least two rules of perspective that you should be familiar with:

the closer you get to a subject, the larger it will appear on the image frame (yeah, this one’s obvious) as you move closer to your scene, the closest objects will increase in size faster than the distant objects (not so obvious)

The second rule is the one we often forget, and it’s best illustrated with an example, so take a look at this photo I took in the Eastern Sierra of California:

In this photo, I was standing about 100 ft (30 m) from those boulders in the foreground. As a result, the dominant object in this shot is the mountain in the background, which stood miles away from the boulders.

Now, look what happens when I move just 50 ft (15 m) closer to those boulders:

All of a sudden, the mountains in the background don’t look so mighty, and now those boulders in the foreground are the dominant objects. This photo has a drastically different feeling than the previous one. The perspective you choose for a landscape will depend on the feeling you’re trying to convey.

Personally, in this case I prefer the first photo, because as I stood there in front of the scene, I felt like the mountain was in charge: it had an overpowering effect on me. So, I decided to give it an overpowering effect in the final image.

Another lesson to learn here: you probably noticed how different the lighting conditions are between the two photos above. The first shot was taken about 15 minutes before sunrise and the second shot was about 15 minutes after sunrise. Lighting conditions can change in milliseconds, so make sure you’re there for the entire show and be prepared to capture that light at any moment!

So, why do you need a telephoto zoom lens?

Since perspective is determined solely by where you put the camera, you’ll sometimes find that the most pleasing perspective is viewed from a great distance. So, to fill the frame with this perspective, you’ll need to zoom in to it with a longer focal length.

For example, the first photo above was taken at 70mm (on a 1.6x crop factor camera). I could have shot it at 40mm, but I wouldn’t have filled the frame: I would have inadvertently captured many of the surrounding elements of the scene.

The second shot was taken at 40mm, and this shorter focal length was necessary because I was much closer to those boulders in the foreground.

So, the lesson here is that carrying a wide range of focal lengths allows you to capture a wide range of perspectives.

What’s the best telephoto zoom lens for landscape photography?

This is definitely debatable, but most photographers would recommend the 70-200mm range (available from most camera manufacturers). Personally, I use Canon’s 70-200mm F/4L and it is easily my favorite lens (it’s great for wildflowers too!).A Post By: Darren Rowse

Last week we posted an image collection containing some beautiful black and white portrait photography. This week a friend suggested a collection of black and white landscapes.

UPDATE: Learn more about how to take great Black and White Landscapes and Portraits with our new Guide to Black and White Photography.

At first I was a little hesitant – when I think of landscapes I have to admit lots of colour comes to mind – but the more I thought about it – the more I realised that it would make a great collection. So here are a few black and white landscapes to get your creative juices flowing!

UPDATE: Discover how to improve your Black and White Photography with our Essential Guide to Black and White Photography.We just had a beautiful Aurora Australis hit New Zealand a couple of days ago. I was fortunate enough to catch a quiet spot to myself where I could take in the atmosphere and shoot a few images. My favourite from the night was a panorama shot of the Aurora to the south and the galactic core rising to the south east – it was the shot I planned and it seemed to turn out nicely [check out this blogpost if you want to learn how to stitch astro panoramas]. So nicely, it got published in the National newspaper and got me a fair bit of attention on my various social media sites. The frenzy that started with a few keen astronomers and astrophotographers led to a lot of people rushing to similar spots the night after to see if they can watch the aurora. Unfortunately, there were a few disappointed folk who not only couldn’t find a clear view, but also didn’t realise what you see in photos isn’t what you see with the naked eye.

I want to take this opportunity to try and explain the difference between what you see with the naked eye vs what the camera picks up and what subsequently gets shared on social media. To get a full understanding, let’s start with some basic biology.

The Human Eye

Our eyes are made up of two main photo-receptor cells – these are the cells that are responsible for picking up light and helping us to see. Cones are fantastic at picking up details and colour but they are pretty useless in dark situations. Rods, on the other hand, are able to process a lot more light BUT are not able to process colours and details too well. The result, is that in the dark we tend to see things in monochrome/black & white. Rods also take some time to ‘activate’ – that is, when you walk from a light room into a dark room it takes a while for your eyes to adjust and get used to the dark scene. At first, you might not see anything but after 10-15 minutes it’s much easier to see in a darker environment. However, as soon as something bright gets shined into your eyes (like a torch or even a mobile phone screen) the rods shut down and the cones take over. When you look back into a dark space you have let the rods re-activate all over again, meaning you have to wait another 10-15 minutes or so.

What does this mean for aurora spotting?

Why does this matter? Well, for starters, unless you’re in a really bright space, like within the polar circles, the likelihood of you seeing enough brightness from an aurora so that you see colour is quite low. You may see some faint glows but not the vibrant, bright colours like I have in my photo above. Secondly, if you are flashing your torch around or constantly looking at your phone you will be very unlikely to allow your eyes to adjust to the darkness. Astronomy and aurora spotting in particular require patience, something I know I’m not very good at, but it takes discipline. If you do need light then think about getting a red torch light – it affects your eyes far less than bright white light.

What does it look like to the naked eye?

Here’s the best I could do to try and simulate the difference between what you see once your eyes have adjusted. If you just turn up and stick your head out of the door of the car you will likely not see much at all, but after a little while in the darkness you could see the structure, light and movement, but very little colour. The night I was out I could see a faint green glow and that’s about it. If you have a DSLR and a tripod you can get significantly more light information. What I typically do when I get to a nice spot is set my camera up, take a quick test shot and use that to gauge if there’s any action.

The most exciting thing about the aurora is that it does move around in the sky. So, you could well see movement even if you don’t see colour. Here’s a timelapse from the other night for those that are interested:

Conclusion and Etiquette

Basically, if seeing the Aurora is on your bucket list then absolutely go and do it, but make sure your expectations are tempered. If you are close to the poles you will get far, far more light, colour and movement. BUT, if you’re further away from the poles, then the best you’ll likely get is some awesome pillars of light dancing back and forth but nothing like you see in photos. The best you can do is to maximise your chances of getting a great show. So, here are a few pointers:

Sign up for alerts – when a big aurora storm is happening you’ll get told. Unfortunately, these can’t be predicted more than a few days out at a time. There’s no way to plan a trip to New Zealand to view the Aurora – it may happen, it may not. I sign up to SpaceWeatherLive’s updates. Minimise light pollution – move away from populated areas – and make sure you have a clear view to the South (for those in the Southern Hemisphere looking for Aurora Australis, like me) or North (for those in the Northern Hemisphere searching for Aurora Borealis) check Dark Site Finder for some hints of locations. Remember, the moon counts as a BIG light polluter. If it’s a full moon, you will likely not see much at all. BE SAFE. Go with a group of others. Drive to the conditions. Make sure you let people know where you’re going. Keep in cell range. Too many people get hurt traipsing around in the dark. Don’t become a statistic. If you arrive at a popular aurora viewing area DON’T fire up your high beams or leave your lights on unnecessarily. Park the car, switch all lights off. There will be others around who will suddenly get blinded by your headlights or have their photos wrecked by the glare. Try to keep torches pointed downwards while walking around. When you get to a spot you like, switch all lights off. Again, let your eyes adjust and don’t blind others. This includes not using flash. I know grabbing a selfie with the aurora might sound cool – I’ve done it myself. Just don’t do it while there are heaps of others around. Be friendly. Share the space with others. If someone wants help, offer it. If you don’t know what you’re doing and see a person with decent gear taking shots, politely ask for help but they may be too focused. It’s ok, some people are private. For the record, if you see me, come and say hello – I love meeting others. Keep trying. You may not get it the first time. It’s a game of patience, remember. Keep trying and it’ll happen. I’ve been lucky enough to see a few now but last Saturday’s was the biggest. I look forward to seeing more

If you’re new to aurora shooting, here’s a short video I put together from last year to help. Good luck and have fun!We are about to head into the next stargazing season down here in the Southern Hemisphere – I thought this would be a good opportunity to talk about something that many astrophotographers like to do but can seem quite complex – making a panorama of the Milky Way. In this tutorial I’ll go through a couple of my recent panoramas and explain the process used to capture the frames and the software I used to create the final pano. If you haven’t done any astrophotography before then make sure you take a look at this awesome tutorial from Lonely Speck before starting.

The software I’ll be using to make my panoramas is PTGui – it’s not free, but suits what I do – it can also stitch RAW files, which works for me. If you want to try a free option, consider MS ICE – a very powerful tool that works most of the time as well as being quite user friendly. Another option is Hugin, which is immensely powerful, but a little hard to get your head around first time. I honestly haven’t had much success with Lightroom or Photoshop’s panorama stitchers, but you might have more luck! I generally start with PTGui, then move to MS ICE or Hugin if for some reason PTGui isn’t happy – but this is rare.

Why Even Do a Milky Way Panorama?

First up, why would you want to? There are a number of reasons – firstly, and most commonly, a panorama gives you the opportunity to create a composition that isn’t always possible with a single frame. Composition is a huge part of photography so getting the right feel to your final image may necessitate a pano.

Secondly, you might want to take a panorama to take advantage of a fast lens, which will allow more light to hit your sensor, getting brighter pictures. For example, I have a Samyang 14mm f/2.8 lens – a really nice fast lens. However, I also like the sharpness of my Sony 55mm f/1.8 lens, but this obviously doesn’t capture as much of the landscape, so I need to do a panorama to get the same composition. Also, check out this tutorial on how different focal lengths affect your final astro shot.

Third, doing a panorama with a longer focal length gives you far more detail in each frame, meaning your final panorama will not only be far bigger (pixel-wise) but also allow you to reduce the size of the panorama, reducing the noise. When trying to capture a large sky with a single frame the noise from taking the shot will need to be reduced in post-production or with layering multiple images (something I’ve not mastered, I must admit!). However, if you take a panorama you can then reduce the overall size of the final image, significantly reducing the noise in the image. To give you an idea of the improvement in detail here is a 100% crop of Antares (the bright yellow star in the centre of Scorpius) with a Sigma 24mm f/1.4 lens and the Sony Sonnar t* 55mm f/1.8 CZ lens.

Two Panorama Styles

There are far more than two types of night time panorama, but I’ll talk about the two most common. The first is where the Milky Way appears flat and rises straight into the sky. The second is where the MW arcs across the sky in a semi-circle. Let me start by saying that BOTH are real. BOTH are taken in the same manner – the only difference is that the arcing panoramas are shot with a much wider view of the sky. What the photographer is doing is capturing the MW all around them and the final stitching software tries to make sense of the images by keeping the land flat (as it should be!) and the stars arcing in a semi-circle. If we had eyes that had a field of view that wide it would be how we see the stars, but we don’t, so we are more used to the ‘straight’ MW style.

So, here are two styles I’ve taken recently. First, the arcing version across Mt Sunday, Canterbury and the second, the more straight MW shot rising out of the Pacific Ocean. Both of these are after I’ve processed them. I’m not going to cover processing here, but if you want to have a go at processing night shots, take a look at my tutorial here (with a downloadable RAW file).

Tripod Discipline

Taking panoramas at night is NOT easy. During the day you have plenty to see and can easily make sure you overlap each frame. At night, it’s much harder to see the landscape in the foreground and, after a while, all the stars look the same through a tiny LCD lens. Can I recommend you get an indexing tripod that will automatically lock to the pan/pitch you need for each frame or, if you’re cheap like me, use a tripod head that has some etchings (or stickers) that let you know how much you should pan/pitch. I use a birdswing tripod head (can’t afford much else right now) and I printed off some degree marks and stuck them on. I know exactly how much I should pan/pitch for the lens I’m using and I keep to that when out at night. Here’s an example of what I have (taken on a hike in the Port Hills when I lugged my huge tripod up and forgot the quick release plate – genius!).

Taking the Individual Frames

Ok, let’s get started with how you take the frames. This gets harder the longer your focal length. I strongly suggest you practice with a nice wide lens to start with. What I generally try to do is capture a panorama as normal but allow for a far greater overlap between frames (at least 33% overlap). So, in the image below, I took the bottom right shot first, then the bottom middle shot, then bottom left. I then raised the pitch of the tripod to take the 4th image and panned right – this technique is called a serpentine mosaic panorama as it snakes backwards and forwards up the image – it works for me because I can focus on just overlapping with the last image I’ve taken, rather than trying to remember where the first image was and pitch upwards from there.

One thing to remember is that the earth is rotating ALL the time. So, even if you’re only out taking photos for 10-15 minutes the whole frame will move. This is why I always start at the bottom and go horizontally first. If you go vertically by the time you get back to the bottom for the next row of frames the earth has rotated and the stars you want to capture have fallen behind the horizon. Definitely shoot horizontally to avoid this. As I said, with a longer lens, this is a really risky technique – one dud frame and the other 14 are wasted – check each frame quickly after shooting to check there hasn’t been any shaking or blur that you don’t anticipate before moving the tripod to take the next frame.

With the arcing style of panorama you need to capture a far greater field of view so I strongly recommend you do this with a wide lens. Again, start at the bottom and pan your tripod across the horizon first, then pitch upwards and take frames of the sky. The Milky Way will dip into the horizon at two points of the sky – I generally start at one end of the Milky Way and pan all the way to the other size of the horizon where the Milky Way has intersected the horizon. I might even get a few frames past where the MW stars and stops to give me more data, just in case I want to crop the image later. You can see I took the ground images first, then went back and got some other extra images of the edges, just to be sure. I was freezing cold by this time, so don’t blame me for not getting it right first time!

Stitching your Panorama

As I mentioned earlier I’m using PTGui for my stitching. I export the frames I want to stitch as DNG files and then load them into PTGui and click ‘Align Images’. 8 times out of 10, this is all I need to do and the image stitches beautifully.

However, occasionally, the software doesn’t work nicely. This happens where there isn’t enough information in the frames for the software to make a match between individual frames. This happens a lot more with Astro images because it’s hard to identify stars/foreground etc, as everything is so dark. PTGui and Hugin both allow you to add in ‘Control Points’ – these are when you manually add links between two different frames. So, if there’s a star that looks the same in both frame 1 and frame 2, you can manually tell the software that they’re the same thing and it’ll try to keep linking the images with your control points as a headstart. This can be a tedious job, but it’ll mean you get a panorama out of your frames rather than throwing it all away. As you can see below, the software didn’t see any overlap between frames 4 & 5, even though we can clearly see there’s heaps of overlap. It’s most likely because the frames aren’t level with each other and there’s a lot of distortion with the lens I’m using, so the software gets confused. Also, the lack of light in the images makes it really hard to spot the ‘right’ things to link – after a while, all mountains and stars look the same to the software!

Now, I’ve manually added in 9 control points. You want to have at least 4 control points per linked frame – the more, the better! PTGui gives you a nice magnifying glass to isolate the linked area to make sure you are linking the right things in each frame. Once I’ve added in enough control points I try to have the software fill in the gaps and re-align the images. Usually, this is enough to get a nice panorama. If by this point it still isn’t working then I generally get frustrated and walk away and try again another night – but you can keep adding manual control points until you get it right.

Choosing your Panorama Projection

Once you have enough control points PTGui will spit out a draft ‘projection’ or view of the panorama. This is where you can really play with your panorama to get the feel you like. PTGui will give you what it thinks is the best look based on the data is has, but I always like to choose different projections and use the one I like the look of. You can also move the image around and rotate it to suit your composition. It takes some practice, but play around – I’m sure there are cartographers out there that can help explain what the different projections mean, but I just try them out and go with the one that looks good. Here are 3 different projections – I finally chose the Mercator projection for this image.

Masking In/Out

PTGui allows you to use a masking tool to adapt the stitching. This comes in useful when you want to specifically include or exclude a certain frame. In the example below I spotted a satellite I liked the look of – I’d like to have it in my final image, so I’ve used the ‘Green Paint’ tool to force the software to include it in the final panorama. I could equally use the ‘Red Paint’ tool to force data out. I did this to exclude the beach in this image – it was quite close to the edge of the frame, so was a little noisier and more distorted than other frames – so, let’s make sure it’s not used in the final stitch. Again, pretty simple stuff – make sure you experiment to see what suits you 🙂

Exporting for Post-Processing

The final step is to export your panorama for any post-processing you want to do. I generally export in a Photoshop format so I can edit it in PS with Nix (my preferred editing tools). Tiff is also a good export format. Don’t edit astro shots with jpg – it’s just not powerful enough for the detailing you want to do. I usually just export the blended image BUT, you can also export the individual layers if you spot something later you want to edit back into the image that PTGui has removed – remember, the more layers, the bigger the file. This file was nearly 2GBs big with just the blended panorama.

Time for you to have a go…

And that’s it! Time to post-process, which is up to you. To help you practice, I’m including 6 smaller tiff files of my image ‘straight’ pano image. Use them, abuse them under Creative Commons BY-NC (you can do whatever you want with them, even manipulate the images, just don’t use it for commercial purposes and credit Ekant Veer and www.EkantTakePhotos.com as the source of the images). The images are SOOC (no editing) so you get to play with the entire process. If you want to do some lens correction and the info isn’t in the EXIF the images were taken on a Sony A7ii with a Sony Sonnar t* 55m f/1.8 lens.

Here’s a dropbox link to the images

If you have any questions, let me know and I’ll do my best to help out!Simple answer – if you can predict the weather, you can predict the factors necessary to determine if a sunset will be a beautiful red one or not. Already I can feel people shutting this post down knowing how hard it is to get a weather prediction, but stick with me. I’m going to try and explain, in as simple a way as possible, what causes those beautiful, fiery sunsets and, as a result, how you can make sure you’re out there with your camera to take an amazing photo that you can subsequently oversaturate and get you all the votes you ever need on 500px.

Prediction Tools

First up, if you live in the continental USA and you have The Photographer’s Ephemeris then check out the Skyfire app – it will provide a heatmap of where the ‘best’ light will be for your sunset shoots. The rest of us will need to do our best to work it out for ourselves, but it is possible!

The basics…why does sun colour change

In researching this post I realised how complex it is to actually answer this question. If you want to learn more, there are heaps of great physics and meteorology papers out there that you can research (I’ve linked a few goodies at the bottom of this post). But, in layperson’s terms, light isn’t a single colour, but it’s made up of multiple wavelengths. As the light passes through our atmosphere some of these wavelengths hit the molecules in our atmosphere and and ‘scatter’. The longer light passes through out atmosphere the more the light ‘scatters’ – the blue wavelengths are the first to scatter while the red ones hang around. So, when light passes through our atmosphere, unobstructed, at midday it spends a relatively short time being ‘scattered’ so we see a lot of blue, hence the blue sky. However, at sunset, the light from the sun takes a shallower angle and it takes relatively longer for the light to reach us – this leads to more of the light wavelengths scattering and what we see is just the red wavelengths left over.

The best way to describe this is pictorially. This is the point where my followers realise how little Photoshopping goes into my photos because, as you can see, I have not artistic skills. My high school art teacher actually told my parents not to waste any money on buying me art supplies 🙂

Figure 1: Unobstructed Light Leaving a Reddish Sunset

As you can see in Figure 1, the longer light spends in our atmosphere the more of the blue wavelengths are scattered and the more likely you are to see the awesome red colours. BUT, this only really happens when you have an unobstructed view. If there’s loads of cloud cover in the West (where the sun sets!) then you get less light coming to you at sunset, leaving the dull colouration, as you can see in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Clouds to the West obstructing the sunlight and leaving a dull sunset

Clouds

But, don’t fret. Just because it’s cloudy, doesn’t mean it won’t be an awesome sunset. Indeed, having clouds gives you the most interesting colours. The clouds themselves don’t create any light, but they do act like a refractor reflector (thanks Andrew Caldwell!) of the light, meaning we get a more interesting scene. The types of clouds do matter – thick and low clouds means that not enough light will get to you. So some nice high clouds offer a great canvas to reflect red light off.

Clouds also offer you the chance to see some other cool effects, like crepuscular and anti-crepuscular rays (the beautiful rays of light that come from some of the sun’s light being obstructed – too much and you get murky colouration, but when a little light shines through you get some awesome rays).

Moisture in the atmosphere

Too much moisture usually means more water molecules for light to obstruct your light meaning duller colours. Loads of moisture means low thick clouds, which is even worse. If the air is dry, you’ve got a better chance for a good sunset.

Haze and Pollution

I always believed that pollution gave you lovely colours. This is not true, apparently. Pollution acts like other molecules in the air and just obstruct light, giving you a duller effect. This is not to say that haze can’t add to your photos (especially when you’ve got some cool sun rays), but generally it’s best to find clean air.

Best conditions for a fiery sunset

In summary, the best sunsets come from the following:

Clean, dry air. Warm days mean less water molecules to dull your light, making for good sunsets (hence the amazing sunsets in the desert)

Unobstructed weather to the West. Look West and check out the cloud action. If the horizon is clear, it’s a good sign that the sunlight will reach your location.

High clouds over your location. This will give you the best shot at some sweet reflections off the sky as the colours change.

Luck. You can plan and predict but some nights are just better than others. Even though I’ve provided 3 key variables above, they are infinitely complex and almost impossible to get 100% correct. However, since learning about this I’ve been able to generally predict which sunsets will be better than others, saving me a lot of time, heartache and petrol driving out to take shots that turn out to be boring, flat light. Of course, you can just photoshop the hell out of your photos and claim it as being a beautiful sunset – now one will know!



So, what do you think? Ready to predict a fiery sunset? If I’ve missed something or messed something up, let me know!

Further reading

If you’re keen to get into the details of what I’ve written here, here are some good posts that give more info for you. Enjoy!

Optics for Kids Explanation – Great for teaching your kids about light (ok, and for adults who have science ability of kids, like me)

Interview with Stephen Corfidi, a National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration meteorologist by National Geographic (my favourite link here – really informative, but simply explained).

More from Stephen Corfidi talking about the colours of twilight (has some good pics to explain his work in the area and a solid reference list to check out).

Universe Today’s “Why is the Sunset Red?” post that offers a little more detail about the light wavelengthsI hate to tell you this, but almost ever Milky Way shot you see uploaded has probably been Photoshopped/processed in some way. Post-processing is as much a part of astrophotography as taking the shot is. The two go hand in hand; however, there are an abundance of blogs out there on how to shoot Milky Way shots (such as this one from Lonely Speck), but relatively few on how to actually convert what you’ve captured on your sensor into those beautiful images you see other people uploading. So, this is my attempt to show you how I processed one of my photos. I’m using Lightroom 5.5 for all of my processing, but use whatever photo editing program you like – I’ll go through all the steps I used and why I make the decisions I do. HOWEVER, these are my choices and not yours – the best way to understand processing is to do it yourself, so that’s where we’ll start…

RAW Power

First up, if you’re not shooting in RAW then you need to start. There are some commentators emerging who are saying jpgs are more useful than RAW files, but the reality is, if you’re not shooting in RAW you won’t be able to do half the stuff I talk about here. Astrophotograph means RAW. But, maybe you don’t have a DSLR or you live in a light polluted area or, you just can’t be bothered standing in a freezing river in the middle of the night to take a selfie. To help you out, I’ve included the RAW file (in DNG format) here for you to play with. I took this photo last night on my Sony A7ii with a Samyang 14mm f/2.8 lens. It was a single image shot at 14mm, f/2.8, 25 second exposure and ISO3200. Download the file and play with it. Muck around with it – it is yours under the creative commons license. I’d love to see how you interpret the same raw image, so post it back here as a comment or post it on my Facebook page – remember, YOU make the choices to come up with the result you want to see – you’re the artist now.

Start at the Very End

It seems odd, I know, but always start with what you want the image to look like in your mind. What colours/feel/emotion do you want your image to show? Imagine that final image and then work towards that goal. You may adjust that ideal image while your process, but you need a goal to aim for. For me, I wanted a clean blue/purple feel with a punchy Milky Way in the middle. Here’s a comparison between the original image and the final processed shot that I was aiming for.

Lens Correction

Once I’ve downloaded the images onto the computer and found a picture I want to process I always start by correcting the lens distortion. The automatic lens correction is always a good place to start, but you may still have to do some manual adjustments to eliminate the distortion from your lens. Of course, the amount of distortion depends on the lens you’re using – I shot this with a Samyang 14mm f/2.8 lens, so the lens correction makes a big difference to the edges of the image.

Cropping and Composition

I’ll admit, I made a mistake with this shot and didn’t make sure the gear was completely level before shooting – happens when you’re in a flowing river in the middle of the night, but a good chance to practice some cropping. I crop not only to straighten an image, but also to get the composition I want. So, adjust the image to suit your needs and focus in on the elements that suit you. Lightroom has a handy ruler tool that helps with leveling out a shot – you can draw the ruler across a flat horizon and it’ll adjust the image accordingly. I also used cropping as an opportunity to keep the river I was standing in as part of the bottom third and the stars to occupy the upper two thirds.

White Balance

I always tend to start with adjusting the white balance. For me, white balance has such a substantive effect on the whole feel of an image that it’s the first thing I adjust and build the rest of the processing around it. Doesn’t mean I can’t go back and adjust the white balance later, but it’s the first step. I always like to see what Lightroom thinks the WB should be by doing ‘Auto’ white balance. Sometimes I like it, sometimes I don’t. In this case, I wanted something with a more blue feel than what Lightroom suggested, so adjusted the colours to suit my taste.

Time to get Sliding

Now, we start to get into the guts of post processing and where you really see the advantage of using RAW files. Without a RAW file you wouldn’t be able to get the fine adjustments from the various tone sliders available in most post processing software programs. I wish there was a hard and fast rule to say what you MUST do with the sliders, but there really isn’t. I started by sliding each slider to the maximums to see what they did and then found a balance that I liked. I personally don’t like the full on, highly sharpened and contrasted Milky Way shots – I prefer the flatter, more subtle shots, so I only adjusted the sliders a little. Here are the final choices I made for the tones.

Embrace your Curves

The Tone Curve is another way to get some real expression in your shots. As a basic overview, the top right controls the highlights and brighter tones while bottom left is for the darker tones. I’m really focusing on getting the stars to punch out with the tone curve, so I have gone with an S-shape curve. This means the highlights (such as stars) stand out as brighter while the darker tones (like space) are made darker, given you greater contrast between the two. As I said earlier, I prefer a slightly subtler effect, but the more aggressive you are with your S-shape tone curve the greater the contrast.

NOISE!!

Noise is all those flecks and discolouration that comes with shooting in dark conditions and with a high ISO. The higher the ISO, the lighter your image; BUT, as a result, you get noisier pictures. Noise is the bane of astrophotographers, especially those who can’t afford high quality glass or some of the hardcore camera bodies out there. I have a good, mid-range Full Frame camera in a Sony A7ii, so it handles noise pretty well, but I still like to eliminate as much as I can. The noise reduction tool in Lightroom is ‘ok’ but it does tend to smooth everything out a little too much, so I only use it sparingly. There are heaps of ways to reduce noise, such as image stacking, but for the purposes of this shot where multiple images wasn’t possible, I’ll just use the slider. There are two areas I like to focus on for noise reduction – what effect does the noise reduction slider have on the foreground (which I want to be nice and sharp) and what effect does it have on the stars (after all, that’s what I want to be the hero of the pic!). I settled on about 25% for noise reduction. You can see that the noise reduction does soften the image, so you can do some sharpening after the fact, if you want, but I’ll leave that alone for now.

Colour Correction

I spotted something in the shot that I hadn’t seen with the naked eye (or even seen on the camera until I started processing the shot) and that’s a faint whisp of green on the horizon. There was no real aurora activity that night (KP3) so it could be airglow or just the very faintest fleck of aurora. Anyway, I liked it and I want to see more of it. Lightroom gives you the option to selective adjust the hue, saturation and luminescence of each colour in the shot. Rather than making the WHOLE shot green, I just increased the saturation of the green tones in the image (which, in this shot, is only that space snot on the right, so nothing else is disturbed).

I also want to give the shot a little more purple in the Milky Way without making the rest of the shot purple, too (which would be the case if you adjusted the white balance to add more magenta). When we know the stars are primarily the brighter elements in the shot you can selectively colour these with the ‘Split Toning’ tool. I chose a soft violet colour and added a touch of saturation. If you want more colour, then up the saturation and adjust slowly to get the feel you want. Equally, if you want to change the colour of the darker tones, you can do that with split toning – I tried that, but didn’t like the results so left that blank.

The Gradient Tool

The gradient tool is really good for getting smooth transitions in your processing. I’m not going to use it for much, but there is one area I need to fix up. The Sony A7ii sensor tends to give you this purpley tinge to the edges when shooting in low light. Wasn’t too much of an issue in the original shot BUT now I’ve added more puple into the shot and increased the exposure a bit in the tone adjustments this distortion is standing out too much for my liking. The way I’ve corrected this is by using gradient tool to desaturate the bottom of the picture and then slowly grade into normal saturation for the rest of the picture. By the time the Milky Way kicks in, we’re back to full saturation.

The Brush

So, this is where I start to wonder how far I should go with the processing. I really, really don’t like manually painting an image because it feels too fake. However, it is a common technique and I’m here to show you what’s available. Let’s start by using the brush tool on the stars. The whole image is looking a little ‘flat’ to me. I want it to punch more, so I’m using the brush tool to add more oomph to the stars by increasing the highlights more, upping the clarity and saturation and decreasing the exposure (to help the stars stand out from the dark background). I manually paint the entire starscape. Let’s see how it looks…

Hmmm, it’s ok, but now the Milky Way feels a little washed out. So let’s use the brush tool to selectively enhance that central strip of stars. I try to make it punch by dropping the exposure of the Milky Way some more and also increasing the contrast. I also adjust the temperature and tint to give the Milky Way a little more selective colour. BUT, how do you do this without it looking garish? Well, this is how I do it. Start by using a large brush tool and making a straight line down the Milky Way – yeah, it looks awful! That’s ok, we’ll fix it up. Hold down alt and the brush tool changes from having a plus (+) sign to a minus (-) sign. Use a really large soft brush (Feather=100) and slowly dip into the Milky Way to soften the whole selection. I bounce my cursor all along the Milky Way to ‘dig’ away at what I initially selected. If you turn on the ‘Show Selected Mask Overlay’ you’ll be able to see what you are influencing with your brush tool – by using a soft brush to slowly inch away at an image you get a much more subtle selection and it doesn’t look as obvious as doing a big manual brush down the middle. Using a soft brush to eat away at your selection also means you’re able to get that blend between the Milky Way and the rest of the background stars. If the difference is too harsh when you turn off the mask then carry on slowly eating away at your mark with the anti-brush tool.

After we’ve played with the brush tool on the stars and the Milky Way we can see the difference it has made to the picture. Again, the more you do, the more aggressive the look, but that’s not what I had in mind, so I’ve tried to avoid that.

Final bit of brushing is for the river. It looks a little bland and still a little too purple for my liking. I’ve gone and used the brush tool to selectively choose the water and adjusted the temperature to be a bit blue, tint to be a bit more green and then desaturated the water. I also reduced the clarity to give it a smoother feel – after all, this was a rushing river, so let’s give it that smooth, flowing feeling.

The Final Countdown

What you realise very early on with post-processing is that getting an image about 90% towards your ideal image is relatively easy…it’s that final 10% that takes time. You find experienced photographers will dwell over an image for an age trying to get it ‘perfect’. There has to be a time to stop and reflect. Once I’ve done all the finer details, I like to stop for a while, switch off Lightroom and do something else for a while. Then, return to the image and see how it looks. See if there are any image-wide adjustments that are worth doing. Whether I like the overall feel of it or not. This usually leads me to make some final adjustments and then post the pic to await the literally handful of people who like it to say so, or, I dump all my work and start again. You can muck around with an image for ages and not achieve anything, so just let it go and try again. Trust me, the more you play and practice the techniques the better you get, so use it as a learning experience, rather than a failure. So, here’s the final comparison between the starting image (cropped and rotated to match) and my final image. Now, time to have a go yourself and see how you go! Don’t forget to download the RAW file and have a play!

Feel free to comment with your processed image and ask any questions you have – I’ll do my best to answer them! Also, don’t forget to share this tutorial if you think it’d be useful to other budding astrophotographers.I thought I’d use this post to show how your lens’s focal length can significantly impact your shots of the Milky Way. First up, I should say that I’m not going to go into depth into the physics of focal length – if you’re not sure about what it is, then check out this post on understanding focal length from expert photography. But, for the purposes of this post I’ll just say that I’m comparing a wide angle lens (Samyang 14mm f/2.8 ED AS IF UMC) with a medium focal length lens (Sony Sonnar FE 55mm t* f/1.8 ZA). Both lenses were used on my Sony Alpha A7ii body and shot on the same night. It was quite a bright night because I had a first quarter moon behind me but there was still plenty to see in the Milky Way and its structure. Ideally, I’d use two lenses that are identical in every way except focal length (aperture, build etc) but that’s just not possible in this case.

Why go wide?

A wider lens will have a much wider angle of view. That means you can capture more of the surrounding area in a single shot. This makes it invaluable when you want to try and take in as much of the scene as possible with one click. It saves you time and means you can move on to do something else. However, a wide angle lens does distort your image – the Samyang lens is a great lens for low light and capturing a huge amount of the scene at once. HOWEVER, capturing more the scene does mean you lose some of the details in the scene. You’re essentially trying to shove a lot more information in the scene into the same space on your sensor. What ends up happening is losing some of the definition of the scene. Couple that with the natural distortion you get from a wider angle lens and you start to get a bit of a skewed image that lacks the same level of detail that you might get from a lens that isn’t as wide.

As a comparison, here’s a single frame straight off the camera of the Milky Way’s core from both the 55mm and 14mm lens:

Already, you can see a big difference between the two. The wider lens captures the Large and Small Magellanic Clouds and far more of the Milky Way, but you get far more detail from the 55mm lens. If I were looking for meteorites, I’d definitely go with the 14mm as you’re more likely to capture something in a wider angle of view, compared to the 55mm (which I caught one in by blind luck!).

But there’s more to focal length than detail alone.

Focal Length and the Rule of 600

One thing new astrophotographers come up against is how to get crisp star shots without any star trails. The Earth is always rotating – although we may not see it happening, it’s happening. A simple rule of thumb to avoid star trailing it to use the ‘Rule of 600’. It’s a simple (but not flawless) heuristic to help you identify how long you can leave your shutter open (here’s my go to blog about the Rule of 600). With wider angle lens takes in more of the allows you to leave the shutter open for longer and avoid star trailing. With my 14mm lens on my Full Frame body I can leave the shutter open for 4x longer and capture far more light before I get star trailing according to the Rule of 600 – I should note here that I almost never leave my shutter open for the full amount I am able to according the Rule of 600 – I prefer the crisper shot associated with a shorter exposure. So, even though you don’t get as much detail, you can get more light onto the sensor with a wider angle lens, which can make a huge difference on a very dark night. But, what difference does focal length have on panoramas?

Panoramas with Different Focal Lengths

I am almost never happy with a single frame of the Milky Way. It’s so big and it’s so beautiful that I want as much of it as possible in my final picture. But it’s almost impossible to do this in one shot, so taking multiple shots and stitching them together to make a Mosaic Style Panorama is the best way to get more of the view. When you have a wider angle lens you don’t need to take as many photos because each shot captures more of the sky. With a more zoomed in lens, you need to take a lot more photos to get the same scene. How that translated on the night – when I was using my 14mm lens I needed to take 9 photos in total to get most of the scene I wanted (3×3 panorama). However, to get roughly the same scene, I needed to take a total of 25 shots with my 55mm lens (5×5 panorama). When each shot takes about 20 seconds with the 14mm lens and 10 seconds with the 55mm lens you’re using up far more time and far more of your battery (a concern for people running with the Sony A7ii body!) with your zoomed in lens.

Taking the photos is also more complicated with a tighter shot – I try and overlap each photo by at least 25% to ensure my stitching software works when I get back home. This is easy to do with a wide angle lens because there’s more reference points on the LCD or through the viewfinder to help you set up your next shot. I can spot a tree and keep that in frame or spot the LMC and keep that in frame etc. With a tighter shot you don’t have that and you have to do you best to keep plenty of overlap (without too much, wasting time). It takes practice and there have been plenty of occasions where I’ve come home and there are gaps in my panoramas where I haven’t overalapped the scene enough. If money wasn’t an option, I’d grab a Gigapan Epic Pro and let that do all the work for me, but when doing panoramas manually it is much easier with a wide angle lens. Do keep in mind that if your lens has a lot of distortion then you may need more overlap between shots to make sure that the final image isn’t too distorted.

Stitching Panoramas with Different Focal Lengths

Something you may not consider until you have to do it yourself is how much processing power you may need to stitch a big panorama together. I have a decent computer that can handle most of the games I play but if you don’t have a decent computer you may struggle to put together a lot of photos at once, especially if you don’t have some decent stitching software. I can highly recommend both MS ICE and Hugin as decent free options for stitching panoramas. I’ve recently bought PT Gui and I love it for complex stitching – very easy to use and very easy to adapt as needed. However, as you can see, the complexity of the stitching between the 55mm and 14mm shot is quite significant, as shown below (you can also see how I suck at lining up shots with some all over the place!):

Now, take into account that the total size of my files being stitched with the 55mm panorama is 3.5GB compared with the 14mm panorama which was less than half the size at 1.6GB you can see why some people aren’t able to carry out stitching with multiple files, like you need with a tighter lens, like the 55mm.

Focal Lengths, Panoramas and Noise

One of the key benefits associated with using a lens like a 55mm is that you end up with a much larger image. Once I’d cropped my images to exclude any unneeded aspects of the scene my 55mm lens yielded a panorama that was a massive 13,560×15,134 pixels! Compare that to the measly 14mm that only gave me a panorama that was 4,302×5,018 pixels in size (which is plenty for most applications, to be honest!). But, one tip that I learnt from the amazing astrophotographer, Rob Dickinson, is that when you have such a huge file when you can reduce its size to something more manageable you naturally reduce any noise you have in the image. Definitely an added advantage compared to using various software solutions to reducing the noise in a shot of the Milky Way.

UPDATE: Another bonus tip from RJD – when using a tighter focal length is that you can go beyond the normal ‘Rule of 600’ time – when you have a huge file you can shrink it down to a more manageable size – this will eliminate any star trails you may have picked up from going for a longer exposure than that dictated by the Rule of 600. Thanks Rob!

Focal Length and Final Imaging

Finally, let’s look at the final images after editing. Straight away you can see more detail and more punch in the shot taken with the 55mm lens. For all its issues with the size of the files, the complexity of shooting the panorama, the time it takes, and the processing power needed to throw it all together, I still prefer the final result. It is crisper, more detailed and the colours are easier to see. The bright moon does mean that a lot of my 14mm shots get affect more from the moon’s glow behind me, which is not as much of an issue on a truly dark night. But, if you’re shooting in a light polluted area you’ll naturally get more light creeping into your image from a wider angled lens, washing out your picture a bit more. You also don’t get the detail in any astronomical bodies you want to shoot (ie, the LMC and SMC are far smaller in the Samyang panorama).

Final Summary

All in all, focal length and shooting the Milky Way makes a huge difference to how a photo is taken, how it is processed, how it is stitched together and how the final image turns out. I thought I’d summarise it all in the table below. I’d love to hear your thoughts on this post and whether you agree/disagree with me and my analysis. Don’t forget to subscribe and share for future posts 🙂Is the iPhone to be feared or... Read More →There are two basic ways to... Read More →Like many of us, my love of... Read More →Most of us use automatic... Read More →Most of us have heard of the... Read More →Attempting to convey our... Read More →In the age of inexpensive,... Read More →Mastering exposure is every... Read More →Of all the wonders of the... Read More →Do you often feel that... Read More →Beginning in the early 1990s,... Read More →The key to exposing snow (and... Read More →It was the bolt atop the... Read More →An infinite number of... Read More →There are few places on earth... Read More →Family and friends have to... Read More →What is a panorama, and why... Read More →It was the bolt atop the... Read More →In the November 2009 issue of... Read More →Using one of my favorite techniques for astrophotography, I take a shot at shooting ultra high resolution urban nightscapes with the Fujifilm X-T2. In this user experience review, I test the X-T2’s low light shooting performance while exploring the cities of London, England and Edinburgh, Scotland at night.

Introduction

This summer was a bit of a different adventure for me in terms of night photography. My fiancée, Diana, and I spent the better portion of a month traveling (for the first time) around England, Scotland and Ireland. I came equipped and prepared to shoot some astrophotography, expecting opportunities as we explored the Scottish Highlands and other rural areas known for relatively dark skies. But in typical UK summer fashion, the majority of our trip was met with daily rain showers and cloudy night skies. As the opportunities for astrophotography outings diminished, I shifted my focus toward the city lights. My tools of choice for this trip was the Fujifilm X-T2 and the Rokinon 35mm/1.2.

My original intention for this review was astrophotography centric, particularly to evaluate the X-T2 for shooting ultra high resolution landscapes under the night sky using a method of panorama stitching. It’s a method I’ve written about before and it’s become my personal favorite technique for maximizing image quality when shooting photos at night. Since I didn’t get to shoot the night sky, I fell back on the city lights. Sometimes we just need to take what we can get.

With our jet-lagged arrival in London and the X-T2 in hand, we had a great excuse to wake up in the late afternoon and stay up until sunrise walking the quiet city streets.

Later that month, we did some more late night walks in Edinburgh. And while I saw nearly no stars on our trip, I returned with a collection of urban night photos that I was really happy with.

The Kit

Adhering to our typical minimalistic packing routine, I brought with me only a few pieces of gear to shoot night scenes in London and Edinburgh:

The Project: Ultra High Resolution Urban Nightscapes

I chose the Fujifilm X-T2 for a few reasons: resolution, portability and low-light capability. I love to pack light when traveling and a small consideration was the X-T2’s capability to be charged directly from a micro USB cable. It’s a small feature but one that makes it very nice for travel as I did not need to pack the external charger just for the camera.

On top of its portability, the Fujifilm’s X-Trans III sensor is particularly good a producing low noise, high resolution raw photos. I was a fan of the performance of the original X-T1 and the increased resolution and newer sensor on the X-T2, among other improvements, seemed to fit the bill for this project. It’s also one of the higher resolution APS-C cameras available on the market. With the X-T2, I specifically wanted to concentrate on capturing 50+ megapixel photos using panorama stitching. With a 24 megapixel sensor, just a few exposures with the X-T2 would allow me to easily capture more than 50 million pixels of data.

The upward trend of technology has just recently started to make 50+ megapixel cameras available on the market. Canon has released their studio targeted 5DSR and on the far end of the spectrum, Hasselblad released the 100.9 megapixel H6D-100c, one of the first true medium format digital cameras. But at $30k+ the high cost of entry into the realm of many megapixels is far too steep for most photographers. I wanted to show that it’s possible to reach resolution numbers that meet and exceed the capability of such an expensive camera as the H6D-100C with a comparably modest small format camera.

The Camera: Hardware Impressions

The X-T2 is a flagship of the APS-C range of cameras available on the market, regardless of brand. On paper, it features some of the highest specifications for any APS-C camera on the market. Among its top specs are 24.3MP stills, UHD video, 14 frame per second rapid fire silent shutter continuous shooting (up to 11 with the mechanical shutter), 325 autofocus points with almost 50% sensor phase detection coverage, and a 100 frame per second electronic viewfinder.

Its retro styled control scheme is one that may polarize many photographers. Personally, I’ve found it particularly conducive to the manual exposure and manual focus technique that’s necessary for both night photography and successful panorama stitches. If you’re familiar with the Fujifilm X-T1, there’s almost nothing different about the X-T2 in terms of general control scheme. There have been small improvements in both software and hardware with the addition of more software programmable button, a thumb accessible control joystick and unlock-able exposure dials but the story here is pretty much the same as the X-T1.

Viewfinder and Screen

I found the X-T2 viewfinder to be markedly different from the older X-T1 and that’s a good thing. It runs at a higher frame rate that reduces when necessary for low-light shooting. It’s not as night-vision capable as the Sony a7S or a7SII, but its performance in low-light conditions is good. With the latest firmware, it has the ability to set a much reduced brightness level for shooting in dark conditions. The biggest improvement, however, is the X-T2’s new feature that allows the use to disable all image processing for the viewfinder output (PREVIEW PIC. EFFECT). Disabling this setting makes it possible to see a “more raw” image through the viewfinder or monitor that’s more representative of what you’d get from an unedited raw file. It makes the image through the viewfinder appear flatter and less contrasty but with more visible detail in the highlights and shadows, making it much easier to visually evaluate exposure success. I found that I enjoyed this “flat” setting significantly more than the default which, regardless of film simulation setting or shadow/highlight setting increases the contrast of the viewfinder too much to easily evaluate shadow or highlight detail visually.

One of the features that I most enjoyed about shooting with the X-T2 was the camera’s improved tilt-screen. The original X-T1 only allowed the monitor to tilt for horizontal compositions. The X-T2 adds one more axis to the tilt mechanism, allowing it to be tilted while using the camera in the vertical, grip-up orientation. It’s significantly more typical to shoot panoramas with the camera in a vertical orientation and so the X-T2’s tilt screen greatly improved the overall shooting experience.

Example Images and Shooting Experience

Our first night photography outings of the trip were in London. With the help and guidance of a fellow photographer, Leo Hoang, we set out to capture some of the staple London landmarks. First on the list, and probably the most difficult shot of the trip (in terms of shooting and post-processing) was Big Ben and the British Parliament building. This shot has been done a million times by other photographers and so I wanted to try my hand at recreating it with a 100+ megapixel panorama, at midnight (12:01, actually), with light trails from passing cars and busses. There were a few factors that made this kind of shot difficult: the lights on Big Ben shut off at about 12:02 AM, multiple instances of passing busses and cars would be needed to form a complete looking set of light trails, and the building is lit so brightly that it pushes into the realm of high-dynamic-range shooting.

I needed to greatly pull down the highlights and lift the shadows in my processing of the photo and I’m happy with the results that came out of the X-T2. Even after a lot of pushing, the shadows remained relatively clean and I found that highlight details were retained very well. The resulting panorama was 147 megapixels.

The X-T2 fared even better shooting in the opposite direction from the Westminster Bridge. The view of the London Eye is a much lower dynamic range scene so nearly now shadow lifting or highlight pulling was necessary, resulting in a very clean and nearly noise free result in a 50 megapixel panorama.

On a second night of shooting, we returned to the Thames river to shoot from the ferry port near the Tower of London, which features a great view of the Tower Bridge and The Shard skyscraper. Since the dock of the ferry terminal shifts with the flow of the river, I did not have the option to shoot a low-ISO long exposure so I was forced to shoot with a faster shutter speed handheld, pushing the ISO up past 1600 for my initial shot of The Shard and all the way to ISO 12800 for the Tower Bridge.

At max ISOs and moderate f/numbers, the X-T2 still produces relatively clean images. Just like the X-T1, grain is well controlled and pleasant with very little color/chroma noise present, even when shooting at maximum ISO settings. My stitches weren’t completely perfect here as I chose as slow a shutter as I thought reasonable to handhold, about 1/50th of a second for the 35mm f/1.2 lens I was using. With the combined motion of the dock I was standing on and my own limitations for handholding, a few frames of the stitch were not completely free of motion blur. Even so, I’m happy with the final results. Both stitches exceed 87 megapixels of resolution. The biggest thing that I noticed about the X-T2, after shooting two handheld panoramas was just how fast it feels in operation compared to the older X-T1. The X-T2 shutter has significantly less blackout time by comparison, a huge improvement over the sluggish second curtain of the X-T1.

The next opportunity we found to shoot urban nightscapes was in the Scottish city of Edinburgh, a highlight of the trip. Edinburgh’s Old City offered excellent night photography opportunities with its cobblestone streets, narrow alleyways and dramatic lighting.

One of my favorite alleyways that we found was called Advocate’s Close which has a direct line of sight from the Old Town to the Victorian styled Scott Monument in the distance. For my shot of Advocate’s Close, I first captured my panorama for the complete scene with the X-T2 on the tripod, after which I shot several handheld photos of various passers-by. In post-processing, I was able to substitute the frame of a passer-by into the panorama for the final stitch. The final photograph of the woman walking Advocate’s Close is 71 megapixels.

I also used the photo opportunity in Advocate’s Close to shoot an ISO-invariance test with the X-T2. Shooting an ISO-invariance test is useful for evaluating a camera’s ISO and dynamic range performance, particularly when shooting conditions are light limited, such as astrophotography or other extremely low-light situations. Check out my article about how to test your camera’s ISO performance. In a few words, an ISO-invariance test is performed by shooting identical exposures, varying only the ISO settings of the camera from the lowest to the highest settings. Then, in post-processing, we equalize the brightnesses of each exposure and compare. DPReview uses the same test in their latest camera reviews.

Upon close inspection of the image at 100% magnification, we can see the small variations in noise at each ISO setting of the camera. Unlike the Fujifilm X-T1, it appears that the X-T2 is not as ISO-invariant. The differences between each ISO setting is small but there is more shadow noise present at ISOs from 200-800 above which shadow noise improves noticeably. From ISO 1600 to ISO 12800, noise levels are nearly identical.

What does this test mean? It means that when using the X-T2 in low-light conditions, there is a small advantage to shooting at ISO settings higher than ISO 800 for the cleanest shadow details. The results of this test are very similar to the results I found for the Sony a6000, but with markedly less chroma noise. It’s likely that the sensor in the X-T2 is based on the same Sony sensor used in the a6000 and other similar cameras.

Diana and I continued exploring the streets of the Edinburgh Old Town. One of my favorite shots of the night was of Edinburgh’s Balmoral Hotel from North Bridge Street. I used the same technique of shooting Big Ben, waiting for multiple instances of buses and cars passing before making an exposure. The final result was 68 megapixels of resolution. I will admit that the retro control scheme on the X-T2 makes exposure adjustments a little bit slower than what I expect on a DSLR or more contemporary camera design. For instance, switching from handheld friendly short shutter times to longer exposures requires two steps: adjusting the shutter dial to “T” (timed) and then adjusting one of the control dials to the desired shutter time. It’s not usually an issue for this type of shooting, but it’s still something to get used to.

From just north of the bridge street photo location, we found a viewpoint overlooking the train station towards the Old Town. While I’m not usually akin to shooting wide format panoramas, it was a great opportunity to capture a wide sweeping panorama of the old town skyline under the rising moon. One of the most notable things I found after shooting so many panoramas is how much I enjoy the X-T2 tilt screen in vertical orientation. It greatly improves the speed with which you can compose and evaluate results versus the older configuration on the X-T1 (and many other Fujifilm or Sony mirrorless cameras). I don’t know why I love it so much, it’s such a simple thing but it really does make a big difference. The tilt screen makes the X-T2 that much more suitable for vertical shots (and panoramas alike).

Getting a little weary after so much walking and panorama shooting, we continued back towards our Airbnb in the Old Town, snapping a single long exposure still (non-panorama) of the Scott Monument as a car passed by.

As we ended our walk for the night, we descended the inclined cobblestone streets of the Old Town and I shot my final long exposure panorama of the night. This shot is of the rising moon above an eerily lit empty intersection of shiny cobblestone. Diana and I were pretty tired from so much walking that I decided to only shoot a two frame pano for final photo resolution of 41 megapixels.

While I shot no astrophotos with the X-T2, my time shooting urban nightscapes with the camera mirrored much of the techniques that I love using for astrophotography. Panorama stitching has become my favorite technique for achieving improved image quality in night photography and the X-T2 was a great camera for this type of methodical shooting. The X-T2 was built to shoot in manual. I used it entirely with a manual focus lens, primarily using the focus magnification function of the camera to evaluate my focus. The dedicated control dials, vertical tilt screen and easily customizable controls made for a great shooting experience.

Overall, I’m super happy with the photos it produced. With a little work and post processing, the panorama stitching technique allowed me to relatively easily produce very high resolution photos that meet or exceed the resolution of a medium format digital camera. While it’s in no way a substitute for a dedicated medium format body, I think the X-T2 was a great camera to use for this panorama stitching technique.

Conclusion

The Fujifilm X-T2 is a very fun camera to use, particularly for manual methodical shooting. It looks and feels almost identical to the X-T1 but with small and welcome improvements. In particular, the ability to vertically tilt the monitor and remove the picture effect preview from the viewfinder/monitor makes for a more natural shooting experience. The focus selection joystick makes adjusting a focus magnification point significantly faster. The low-light performance and image quality of the camera lives up to the great Fujifilm reputation and resembles that of the X-T1 but with greatly improved resolution. In many ways, the X-T2 feels like the camera I wanted the X-T1 to be.

Fujifilm X-T2 Pros:

Great low-light performance, comparable to full-frame

Excellent control scheme and control customization

Vertical and horizontal tilt screen

Ultra smooth electronic viewfinder

Ability to disable picture effect processing from viewfinder/monitor

Improved shorter shutter blackout time

USB rechargeable

Fujifilm X-T2 Cons:

Slightly larger and heavier than X-T1

Expensive compared to the competition

Fujifilm X-T2 Verdict: RECOMMENDED! (4/5)

Where to Buy

This review would not be possible without the help of B&H. They temporarily lent us an X-T2 to evaluate for this review. They’re easily the best camera store in the world and one of the most reputable online retailers. B&H has an excellent return policy and is guaranteed to have the lowest prices anywhere online. If you are considering buying a Fujifilm X-T2, or any equipment for that matter, consider buying through the affiliate links on this page. You won’t pay anything extra, but Lonely Speck will receive a small commission (usually 2-4%) to help run the website. Here are the links that help us run Lonely Speck:

Learn Astrophotography

Astrophotography 101 is completely free for everyone. All of the lessons are available on the Lonely Speck Astrophotography 101 page for you to access at any time. Enter your email and whenever we post a new lesson you’ll receive it in your inbox. We won’t spam you and your email will stay secure. Furthermore, updates will be sent out only periodically, usually less than once per week.

Join 9 343 other subscribers.

Help us help you!

Believe it or not, Lonely Speck is a full-time job. It’s been an amazing experience for us to see a community develop around learning astrophotography and we’re so happy to be a small part of it. I have learned that amazing things happen when you ask for help so remember that we are always here for you. If you have any questions about photography or just want to share a story, contact us! If you find the articles here helpful, consider helping us out with a donation.

Once again, the biggest contribution comes from the use of our affiliate links. When you buy through the links on Lonely Speck, it costs you nothing extra, but we will receive a small commission to help run the site.

Thanks so much for being a part of our astrophotography adventure.

-IanAccessible astrophotography tools keep getting better and better. Here, I review and walkthrough of my new favorite piece of software for processing astrophotography: Starry Landscape Stacker.

In the video below, I walk through my entire process for combining multiple exposures into a single noise-free photograph of the night sky using Starry Landscape Stacker. Download Starry Landscape Stacker at the Mac App Store.

This video was shot on:

Sony a7S (B&H)

Zeiss Batis 18mm f/2.8 (B&H)

Sony Zeiss 55mm f/1.8 (B&H)

Sirui T-025X Tripod (B&H)

Rode Video Micro (B&H)

Where to Buy Equipment

I personally buy almost all of my equipment through B&H or Amazon. We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program and the B&H Affiliate Program, both are affiliate advertising programs designed to provide a means for us to earn fees by linking to Amazon.com and B&H affiliated sites. As the largest online retailers in the US, they both have an excellent return policy and they usually have the lowest prices for camera gear anywhere online. If you are considering buying any equipment, consider buying through the affiliate links on this page. You won’t pay anything extra but Lonely Speck will receive a small commission (usually 2-4%) to help run the website.

Learn Astrophotography

This article is part of Astrophotography 101, my growing series of lessons on astrophotography. It’s completely free for everyone. All of the lessons are available on the Lonely Speck Astrophotography 101 page for you to access at any time. Enter your email and whenever we post a new lesson or blog post, you’ll receive it in your inbox. We won’t spam you and your email will stay secure. Furthermore, updates will be sent out only periodically, usually less than once per week.

Join 9 343 other subscribers.

Help us help you!

Believe it or not, Lonely Speck is my full-time job. It’s been an amazing experience for us to see a community develop around learning astrophotography and we’re so happy to be a small part of it. I have learned that amazing things happen when you ask for help so remember that we are always here for you. If you have any questions about photography or just want to share a story, contact us! If you find the articles here helpful, consider helping us out with a donation.

Once again, the biggest contribution comes from the use of our affiliate links. When you buy through the links on Lonely Speck, it costs you nothing extra, but we will receive a small commission to help run the site.

Thanks so much for being a part of our astrophotography adventure.

-IanOne of the most positive changes we have made to our traveling life is learning how to pack light. Here is a video overview and master list of gear I bring with me while I travel the world with my fiancée. All in one fits-under-the-seat-in-front-of-you bag.





My fiancée Diana and I have been traveling nearly full-time for the last few years. We’ve learned through a lot of trial-and-error the best way to pack for extended travel. Carrying too much stuff is one of the biggest problems with how most people pack for their vacation. We manage to each pack a medium sized backpack with everything we need (and a little more).

I’m currently writing this post while staying in an Airbnb just outside the castle walls of Edinburgh, Scotland. We have been traveling for about two weeks with a few more weeks of travel left and I haven’t once felt that I did not bring enough with me. In fact, I may have brought a little too much, even with this minimal list of gear. In the past, Diana and I have traveled in a very similar manner many times before, moving around Europe or Oceania for months on end with nothing but a modestly sized backpack each.

The List

Other Essentials Not Shown:

Optimizing for Your Needs

There were a few items I did not show in the video. My earphones were doubling as a lavalier mic, my smartphone was recording the actual video and my passport and wallet were in my pockets. I also failed to show our packable daypack, the Sea to Summit Ultra-Sil Daypack which was pulled out of my backpack at the time.

All of this stuff fits into a single medium size (approx. 20-35 Liter) backpack. Obviously, your packing list will probably differ a little bit from mine and there are areas that can be optimized even further, depending on your needs. Ultimately, I think it’s important that everything fit into a carry-on size bag that can fit underneath an airline seat. It differs by airline, but typically, if it’s roughly less than 20″ (50cm) tall, 13″ wide (35cm) and 9″ (25cm) deep, your back should fit underneath the seat in front of you. There are many many bags that will fit this profile. Just keep it small and pack from there.

If I were to trim down my already small packing list, there are a number of areas I would optimize: laptop, camera gear and clothes.

My laptop is not small. It’s an older generation 15-inch Macbook Pro. It’s still compact for a 15″ laptop but is overkill for most photographers’ needs. At the time, I bought it for the graphics card. With the latest generation of computing power, a much smaller laptop would suffice. My choice today would be something more like the new 12″ Macbook or Surface Laptop. Also, a computer gaming mouse is completely unnecessary unless you want to play computer games like me. Similarly, 3x USB hard drives is also likely unnecessary. I just have an active project where I actually need that much storage.

Ultimately, a laptop is not even necessary. I’ve traveled previously with just a tablet and portable keyboard instead. Many cameras like the X-T2 now support wireless transfer of files for quick sharing, USB OTG SD card readers are cheap, there’s an android app that converts RAW files to DNG and Snapseed (Android / iOS) supports DNG files. A laptop is now optional.

This is a blog about photography so I’m not going to suggest ditching a dedicated camera just yet. That said, I packed the Fujifilm X-T2 and Rokinon 35mm f/1.2 which makes for a medium to large sized mirrorless camera. One camera body and no more than two lenses is still my personal recommendation when traveling. I might suggest going even smaller if you can. I could have reduced even more weight by using a pancake lens or swapping the entire kit for a highly capable large sensor point and shoot like the RX100 series.

My tripod, the Sirui T-025X is about as small as it can be while still being a “full-size” tripod. If I wasn’t trying to do much night photography or long exposure work, I might opt for a smaller travel tripod like the Pedco UltraPod.

And finally, should I wish to reduce the load even more, I would travel with only 2x pairs of underwear and 2x t-shirts washing one set each night. I’d also consider swapping my shorts and jeans for a pair of synthetic convertible pants.

Closing Thoughts

The idea of minimalism has completely changed our lives. Applying the concept to travel is a liberating and enabling experience. Less stuff makes it easier to concentrate on the place you are. It frees us from distraction and makes it easier to get up and go. I hope my packing list here can help you pare down your travel packing list before your next great adventure.

Where to Buy

I personally buy almost all of my travel and photography gear through B&H or Amazon. We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program and the B&H Affiliate Program, both are affiliate advertising programs designed to provide a means for us to earn fees by linking to Amazon.com and B&H affiliated sites. As the largest online retailers in the US, they both have an excellent return policy and they usually have the lowest prices for camera gear anywhere online. If you are considering buying any equipment, consider buying through the affiliate links on this page. You won’t pay anything extra but Lonely Speck will receive a small commission (usually 2-4%) to help run the website.

Learn Astrophotography

This article is part of Astrophotography 101, my growing series of lessons on astrophotography. It’s completely free for everyone. All of the lessons are available on the Lonely Speck Astrophotography 101 page for you to access at any time. Enter your email and whenever we post a new lesson or blog post, you’ll receive it in your inbox. We won’t spam you and your email will stay secure. Furthermore, updates will be sent out only periodically, usually less than once per week.

Join 9 343 other subscribers.

Help us help you!

Lonely Speck is my full-time job. It’s been an amazing experience for us to see a community develop around learning astrophotography and we’re so happy to be a small part of it. I have learned that amazing things happen when you ask for help so remember that we are always here for you. If you have any questions about photography or just want to share a story, contact us! If you find the articles here helpful, consider helping us out with a donation.

Once again, the biggest contribution comes from the use of our affiliate links. When you buy through the links on Lonely Speck, it costs you nothing extra, but we will receive a small commission to help run the site.

Thanks so much for being a part of our astrophotography adventure.

-IanSony makes excellent cameras. In the last few years, they launched a completely new full frame camera system that has pushed the bounds of digital photography. I switched entirely to Sony gear after first seeing the tremendous low-light capability of their a7S and have enjoyed many outings shooting astrophotography on many different Sony camera bodies since. I have previously recommended Sony gear to countless numbers of fellow photographers looking for the best landscape astrophotography cameras. That is no longer the case. If you want to shoot landscape astrophotography, don’t buy a Sony. If you already have a Sony camera, don’t update the firmware.

Here’s why I no longer recommend Sony cameras and how the latest firmware update made Sony’s a7RII and a7SII terrible for astrophotography.

UPDATE, May 4, 2017: Rob Shelley of Sony Pro Services has responded with the following message:

—

Ian, your Star Eater post was forwarded to me by a reader. Great insight that I will pass along to Engineers for developmental consideration.

As you noted, replies from Sony are not frequent but are often heard. Feel free to, if you have other comments, forward them along to me and I will get them to the appropriate departments and individuals.

Contact me any time by phone or email.



All the best.

Rob Shelley

Pro Services Support Manager Southwest

Sony North America

—



UPDATE, May 4, 2017: I received the following reply from Trung Vu of Sony Alpha Pro Support:

—

We have forwarded your concern to our sustaining engineering group.

Trung Vu

Senior Product Specialist

Sony Alpha Pro Support

—

UPDATE, May 5, 2017: I spoke with Rob Shelley of Sony Pro Services on the phone. He has informed me that he will try to contact the relevant parties in engineering about the concern. That said, it seems as if he was never previously aware of this issue and is not fully sure of what needs to happen next for a fix. I hoping that he will take this matter seriously and find the right people in order to forward our collective concern.

UPDATE May 6, 2017: I and several others have received the following generic reply from [email protected]:

—

We’re sorry to hear that. To best assist you regarding this concern, please call our alpha support team.

Sony support hotline: (800) 222-7669

Sony alpha technical team: 1-239-245-6360

Business Hours:

Monday – Friday 8:00 AM to 12:00 AM ET (Midnight).

Saturday – Sunday 9:00 AM to 8:00 PM ET.

We look forward to your continuous support to Sony products.

Regards,

Anthony

Sony Social Media Team

—

UPDATE: May 30, 2017: The Sony a9 does it.

UPDATE: June 8, 2017: Sony has released a new firmware update (4.00 for the a7RII and 3.00 for the a7SII) that purportedly provides a fix for the Star Eater Issue. The firmware update notes mention the change “Improves image quality when Long Exposure NR setting is OFF.” The change presumably allows users to now disable the Star Eater algorithm as long as the Long Exposure NR setting is set to OFF. Previously, the Star Eater spatial filtering was enabled even if the Long Exposure NR setting was set to OFF. User navmannz on the Fred Miranda and DPReview forums is claiming that 4s – 30s is fixed but I have not confirmed this myself.

UPDATE: June 10, 2017: I am still evaluating the new firmware with the help of others.

UPDATE: June 13, 2017: I can confirm now that the latest firmware updates (4.00 for the a7RII and 3.00 for the a7SII) do not change the behavior of the cameras in any significant way. Jim Kasson did a great technical analysis of the issue with the latest firmware. So basically, this update was a false alarm. I received help from several of you to come to this conclusion, thanks for sending me your RAW files. I’m going to be relaying the latest to Sony Pro Support and hoping that they can help continue to get the message to the right people to see a fix through.

UPDATE: July 28, 2017:

PLEASE SIGN OUR PETITION TO SONY TO HAVE THIS ISSUE FIXED.

Thanks everyone who has been trying to contact Sony. Keep calling. This isn’t fixed yet. –Ian

–Original Article Below–

In August of 2016, Sony made firmware changes to their two flagship a7 series cameras (the a7RII and a7SII). The update (3.30 on the a7RII and 2.10 on the a7SII) was supposed to include improvements for radio controlled lighting and overall camera stability and temperature control. But hidden in these improvements is a change that affects the image quality when shooting long exposures, particularly astrophotos. The problem has been dubbed “Star Eater” by others in the astro community.

The “Star Eater” problem is a form of software spatial filtering designed to reduce noise in photos, particularly hot pixels. Unfortunately, the rather rudimentary filtering algorithm that Sony is using easily mistakes sharp pinpoint stars for noise, deleting them from the image or greatly reducing their brightness. The result is an astrophoto with less stars and the appearance of diminished resolution. Sony a7RII and a7SII cameras with the latest firmware exhibit this problem for all exposure times longer than 3.2″. Furthermore, the “Star Eater” issue affects RAW images (whether uncompressed or not) and cannot be disabled by any means. To top it off, it’s impossible to downgrade your firmware to a previous version.

The firmware change was introduced months ago but is only now starting to be noticed as more and more astrophotographers update the firmware of their cameras. I have confirmed the issue myself and it has been discussed and analyzed many times on other places around the online photography community, particularly on the DPReview forums, Cloudy Nights, Jim Kasson’s Last Word, and more recently on Sony Alpha Rumors.

Bad spatial filtering isn’t new to Sony’s Alpha cameras. Even with the older firmware, all recent Sony alpha mirrorless cameras including the a6000, a6300, a6500, a7S, a7R, a7, a7II, a7SII and a7RII exhibit the “Star Eater” issue when using the Bulb exposure mode. Untracked landscape astrophotography rarely requires exposures longer than 30″ so I never found that the issue affected my photography. Now, with the latest firmware updates on the a7RII and a7SII, what was once a problem that only affected the niche case of Bulb exposures now affects all reasonable untracked astrophotography exposure times for common focal lengths. And on their flagship mirrorless cameras to boot.

I’ll admit that it is a problem that requires a fair bit of pixel peeping. Some photographers might never even notice the issue. But as our community shifts more and more towards the enthusiast, to the photographer who really cares about the finest capability of their equipment, an issue like this is tremendously disappointing to many of us.

Personally, learning of this change (and verifying the issue for myself) has led me to question my desire for future Sony camera bodies (it is still unconfirmed if the new Sony a9 is affected). It has certainly made me very skeptical of future firmware updates from Sony. Mostly, I hate the thought of having recommending a camera to so many people only to learn that something has changed that would have me question my original recommendation. These aren’t cheap tools.

So, it is with great disappointment that I will no longer recommend Sony cameras, particularly the a7RII and a7SII with the latest firmware, until we see a fix. If you’ve shared the same love of Sony cameras as I have in the past, and you own one of these cameras, help us reach out to Sony directly by calling Sony at:

Sony support hotline: (800) 222-7669

Sony alpha technical team: 1-239-245-6360

Please reference this article at: lonelyspeck.com/stareater

They introduced the problem with firmware. They can fix it with firmware. If enough of us call, maybe we can get them to issue a fix.

I have already started reaching out to Sony directly as well as writing to several of my contacts close to Sony to see if we can get some action. So far, Sony has not responded to my initial emails and many other photographers have experienced the same lack of response. I think that the only way to get a fix is to keep trying to contact Sony. If you have contacts at Sony, any help reaching out to them would be greatly appreciated by me and many others.

I will update this blog post accordingly if I see any significant progress.

My open letter to Sony is a re-writing of this blog post and is published below:

—

Hello Sony, I am writing with great concern about the so-called “Star Eater” problem affecting Sony Alpha cameras. Most of the latest Sony Alpha cameras employ a spatial filtering noise reduction algorithm when using Bulb mode. This noise reduction targets hot pixels. It affects RAW files and cannot be turned off, even when using Uncompressed RAW. The primary issue with the spatial filtering is that it greatly affects astrophotography: dimmer stars that occupy only a few pixels are erased, essentially “mistaken” for noise by the filtering algorithm. The result is an astrophoto with greatly reduced visibility of dim stars and an overall appearance of reduced resolution. This issue affects all recent Sony alpha mirrorless cameras including the a6000, a6300, a6500, a7S, a7R, a7, a7II, a7SII and a7RII. It likely affects more models, too. The issue has been thoroughly discussed and analyzed by others in the community, particularly on the DPReview forums and on Jim Kasson’s Last Word blog. References are at the bottom of this email. My blog, lonelyspeck.com, focuses specifically on accessible landscape astrophotography for beginners and I’ve personally been a big fan of Sony cameras up until now. While the spatial filtering on Sony Alpha cameras has been documented for a long time, it didn’t really affect the simpler forms of astrophotography that do not require shutter times longer than 30s. If we used these cameras in M mode and let the camera time the exposure up to 30s long, the camera would not apply the problematic spatial filtering. For most cases in landscape astrophotography, night sky exposures almost never exceed 30s in order to reduce star trailing. But I’ve recently learned, particularly through some emailing with readers, Sony Alpha Rumors, as well as the DPReview forums and Jim Kasson’s blog, that Sony has issued firmware updates to at least the a7RII and a7SII (3.30 and 2.10, respectively) that now forces the same “Star Eater” spatial filtering on all exposures that exceed 3.2s in shutter time, even when not in Bulb mode. What was once a problem that only affected the niche case of Bulb exposures now affects ALL reasonable untracked astrophotography exposure times for common focal lengths. Personally, learning of this change (and verifying the issue for myself) has led me to question my desire for future Sony camera bodies and has made me very skeptical of future firmware updates. I hate the thought of having recommending a camera to someone only to learn that something has changed that would have me question my original recommendation. These aren’t cheap tools. As a result, I’m no longer recommending and will be forced to discourage the use of current and future Sony cameras on my blog, unless we see a fix. I’m reaching out because I believe Sony has the capability to fix this issue to win back the support of so many loyal fans. We have already seen Sony make improvements and fixes to the a7 series when DPReview published about the original issues with Sony’s compressed RAW artifact problems. As a result, Sony issued firmware updates for the a7II, a7SII, and a7RII that enabled uncompressed RAW. It was a fix that was favorably commended by many in the photography community. Now, we need another fix. Sony, please fix the “Star Eater” spatial filtering issue via a firmware update… the problem was introduced/exacerbated with firmware so it’s obvious it can be fixed with firmware. At the very least, make it a selectable option in the menu such that it can be disabled when desired. Adding the option to disable it for Bulb mode would just be icing on the cake. This letter is available publicly as a blog post on lonelyspeck.com, documenting the issue for my readers. I’ve recommended the a7SII and a7RII to so many people for landscape astrophotography and it would feel disingenuous to not tell them about this issue. For reference, here are a number of online sources that discuss the “Star Eater” problem: DPReview: https://www.dpreview.com/forums/post/58709160

https://www.dpreview.com/forums/post/55841466 Cloudy Nights: https://www.cloudynights.com/topic/498339-sony-a7s-star-eater-algorithm/

https://www.cloudynights.com/topic/505754-another-real-world-example-of-sonys-star-eater-problem/

https://www.cloudynights.com/topic/558230-star-eater-in-action-sony-a7rii/ SAR: http://www.sonyalpharumors.com/specific-a7sii-astrophotography-fix-request/#disqus_thread Sony Community: https://community.sony.com/t5/Alpha-NEX-Cameras/Star-eater-in-bulb-mode/td-p/508740 From Jim Kasson: http://blog.kasson.com/the-last-word/spacial-filtering-of-raw-images-by-sony-a7s-a7ii/

http://blog.kasson.com/the-last-word/sony-a7rii-long-exposure-spatial-filtering-with-fw-3-30/

http://blog.kasson.com/the-last-word/16486/

http://blog.kasson.com/the-last-word/lenr-and-sony-a7rii-fw-3-30-lowpass-filteering/

http://blog.kasson.com/the-last-word/reverse-engineering-the-sony-a7rii-long-exposure-spatial-filtering/

http://blog.kasson.com/the-last-word/sony-a7rii-bulb-spatial-filtering/ Sincerely, Ian Norman

[email protected]

lonelyspeck.comAlbert Dros has been a great friend to Lonely Speck over the last few years, sharing with us his experiences shooting landscape astrophotography around the world. We had the pleasure of meeting him in his native environment of the Netherlands when we traveled through Europe last spring. A few weeks ago, Albert messaged me about his plans to photograph the Milky Way behind an erupting volcano. In this article, Albert Dros recounts his personal experience planning and shooting the Fuego Volcano in Guatemala.

The Idea

Nature has lots to offer for landscape photographers. We love to shoot nature’s paintings. Storms, rainbows, tornadoes, lightning strikes: they’re all a gift from nature that we can play with as a landscape photographer. Volcanoes are one of them, too, especially when they’re erupting. I have been fascinated by volcanoes; they have been on my list to shoot for quite a while. My younger brother recently went to Guatemala for some backpacking and learning the Spanish language. When he sent me some photos of an erupting volcano, my photography senses were immediately triggered. The erupting volcano was called ‘Fuego’ (literally “Fire”). I managed to find webcams and activity on scopes and checked how active Fuego was. According to the history, the volcano has remained quite active, but you had to be lucky to see a lot of eruptions. Still, the idea of meeting up with my brother and shooting a volcano seemed like a good enough reason to go.

The Plan

When I decided I wanted to go to Guatemala to try and shoot the volcano, I started doing my research on how I wanted my shot to look. Erupting lava is best visible in evening and night, so I was obviously going for that. I researched other shots from this volcano. Most good shots were during a full moon so that you could see the scenery well, lit by the full moon in combination with the lava eruptions. I wanted to try something different. I have always been intrigued with planning and photographing the Milky Way at particular locations. How awesome would it be to shoot the erupting volcano with the Milky Way?

I checked from what angle I would be able to see the erupting volcano. The place from which I was going to be shooting was the (inactive) neighbour volcano Acatenango. It’s possible to hike up to the top of this Acatenango for a good view of the active Fuego. I planned the shot with the PhotoPills app, and to my excitement this shot was actually possible. In the last week of March, around 3 AM, the Milky Way galactic center would be in a good position right next to the volcano. By planning on PhotoPills and visualising the view in my head, I could see how the optimal shot would unfold.

I made my plan a few weeks before going to Guatemala, targeting the date of 30 March, 2017. Should the conditions change, the plan wouldn’t differ too much for the other days around my target date.

While I made my plan with a private Alpha version of PhotoPills for Android, PhotoPills has since released a public Beta for Android users.

What I Needed

So what did I need to get the shot?

1) The right date for the Milky Way to rise next to the Fuego volcano, as seen from the Acatenango volcano

2) A clear night free of cloud cover

3) Date close to new moon for good visibility of the stars

4) Most importantly: luck. I wanted lava eruptions at the right times of the evening

I figured it would be extremely difficult to get both the stars and the lava properly exposed in one exposure because of the huge contrast difference. To get the perfect balance of exposure, I thought I would have to shoot during late blue hour at sunset or early blue hour at sunrise. When planning a trick shot like this, there are a lot of factors I considered. I always like to plan everything that can be planned.

When I succeed in making a difficult landscape shot, people often say “wow, you were so lucky.” They’re often actually right. In the end you always need that extra bit of luck for everything to fall into place. But ultimately, I try to keep the chances as good as possible with careful planning. For example: checking scopes and webcams every day to ‘get to know’ the volcano and calling the weather station multiple times to improve my awareness of the chances of getting a successful shot.

The Trip

A few weeks later, after a nearly 30 hour plane trip including transfers, I found myself in Antigua, Guatemala, a nice town close to the Fuego volcano. From the town, I could see the top of the Fuego blowing smoke with occasional rumbling.

Checking the seismograph activity online showed that, in the days during my travel to Guatemala, the volcano had been very active. We called the weather station multiple times that day to ask their thoughts on what day would be best to climb the adjacent Acatenango volcano in regards to both volcanic activity of Fuego and for clear skies. According to the station, the weather predictions for the next day looked good and it would be the best day to try our luck. I was originally planning on getting a day of rest in Antigua before climbing the volcano but I knew I had to move fast.

Gear

I knew the hike wasn’t going to be easy so I had to keep my gear relatively light while still maintaining great image quality. I also heard stories about bandits robbing tourists on the volcanoes in Guatemala and those stories worried me the most as I was bringing expensive gear. I chose to put my camera gear in a super worn out bag that didn’t look like a camera bag at all. I figured that with a relatively light and small kit, I wouldn’t stand out. I needed a tripod, but not one that would scream ‘I’m a photographer’ so I brought a small Mefoto travel tripod that I borrowed from my friends at Benro. It was small enough that it could fit in my backpack such that no one would see it. Here’s the final list of camera gear that I brought up to the volcano:

The Shoot

The next day, after a very tough steep hike, I found myself on the Acatenango volcano, arriving to the shooting location just before sunset. Unfortunately, it was very cloudy and I couldn’t even see the Fuego volcano next to me. However, the clouds were moving fast so I hoped it was going to clear up. It did.

When I finally saw Fuego erupt up close, combined with the power of its sound, I was paralysed with awe. It was amazing. It was one of the most impressive things I had ever seen in nature.

My research paid off. All the elements I needed to create the shot that I wanted seemed to fall into place. It’s a great feeling when things go as planned. The real show started as it got darker: Fuego kept erupting and the glowing lava finally became visible. It was surreal. The sight of an erupting volcano is something I was only used to seeing in movies.

During the blue hour, the volcano unfortunately became calm for a while. Blue hour would have been perfect to shoot the eruptions as the contrast between the sky and the lava would not have been as large. I figured that it would be much more difficult to shoot during the dark hours of the night because of the increased contrast between the bright lava and the dark night sky.

I was right. The pure darkness during the night made for difficult shooting conditions. The huge contrast between the bright lava and the darkness of the night made it extremely difficult to shoot everything in a single exposure. In this early shot, the lava is overexposed while the rest of the image is still very dark.

For good close up shots with the Milky May, I knew I had to wait for the early morning blue hour and hope for a good eruption. Only until then, the Milky Way would line up with the volcano. Early in the night, only the fainter parts of the Milky Way were visible off to the left of the volcano.

Even early in the night, the view was nothing short of spectacular. Seeing the Fuego erupt under thousands of stars was unbelievable. Below is a panoramic shot from the view in front of my tent. The volcano on the left is a sleeping volcano called Agua. Agua, water. Fuego, fire. In between these volcanoes are a few little towns. I was surprised to see that these towns did not cause that much light pollution the sky. Luckily, there was some kind of haze layer blocking some of the light pollution, allowing us to see a beautiful starry sky. I knew the best part of the Milky Way would arch across the valley in early morning, but I already found this view amazing.

I kept shooting for a while until I decided to get some sleep in my tent around 10 PM. While it was around 30°C (86°F) in Antigua during the day, at 3500 m (11,483 ft) it was below 0° Celsius (32°F). Even though I was prepared, it was still extremely cold. Furthermore, I didn’t get very much sleep as the volcano periodically kept erupting in loud explosions. I eventually woke up around 2 AM for more shooting. As planned, the Milky Way stretched over the valley to the left of Fuego.

Although all of this was amazing, I wouldn’t be me if I still wasn’t 100% satisfied. As I mentioned before, I really wanted a close up of the erupting volcano with the Milky Way. My best opportunity was that morning. I put my camera in position for the early blue hour when the Milky Way would still be visible. At that time, a very faint crescent moon had risen in the sky, giving me some extra light on the foreground. I set everything up and waited for the right moment. I just needed that right eruption. And then it happened.

A captured a perfectly timed shutter with the Milky Way in place behind the fiery lava of the erupting Fuego volcano. When I first saw it on my camera screen, I couldn’t believe my eyes. The satisfaction that I got from succeeding in taking what seemed to be an almost impossible shot is hard to describe.

Having the shots I wanted for the night, I enjoyed the warmth of the rising sun not too long afterwards. I was already satisfied so I didn’t shoot too much more, deciding instead to enjoy the moment. After the sun was fully up, the Fuego treated us a final goodbye show with nonstop eruptions that caused the whole valley to be covered in smoke and ash.

I still feel that all of the images here still don’t do justice to the reality of my experience. Seeing a volcano erupt at night is one of the most beautiful things in nature I have ever seen.

Help Support Us!

We hope that you enjoyed this inspirational article by our guest contributor and great friend, Albert Dros. Check out more of Albert’s spectacular landscape photography and astrophotography on his website: AlbertDros.com and follow Albert’s worldwide travels and photography adventures on his Instagram, Twitter, Facebook and 500px. You can also help out Albert directly by purchasing gear through the links on this page.

We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program and the B&H Affiliate Program, both are affiliate advertising programs designed to provide a means for us to earn fees by linking to Amazon.com and B&H affiliated sites. As the largest online retailers in the US, they both have an excellent return policy and they usually have the lowest prices for camera gear anywhere online. If you are considering buying any equipment, consider buying through the affiliate links on this page. You won’t pay anything extra but Albert Dros will receive a small commission (usually 2-4%).

Learn Astrophotography

Astrophotography 101, is a growing series of lessons on astrophotography. It’s completely free for everyone. All of the lessons are available on the Lonely Speck Astrophotography 101 page for you to access at any time. Enter your email and whenever we post a new lesson or blog post, you’ll receive it in your inbox. We won’t spam you and your email will stay secure. Furthermore, updates will be sent out only periodically, usually less than once per week.

Join 9 343 other subscribers.

Help us help you!

Believe it or not, Lonely Speck is a full-time job. It’s been an amazing experience for us to see a community develop around learning astrophotography and we’re so happy to be a small part of it. We have learned that amazing things happen when you ask for help so remember that we are always here for you. If you have any questions about photography or just want to share a story, contact us!

Thanks so much for being a part of our astrophotography adventure.ISO is one of the three major exposure settings in the exposure triangle of a digital camera. Of the three: shutter time, f/number, and ISO, it is ISO that is probably most misunderstood. Even more so than f/number. In fact, it is a common misconception that higher ISO settings will cause images to be noisier. In fact, the opposite is often true. Wait, what?

That’s right, higher ISO settings alone do not increase image noise and higher ISOs can even be beneficial to low-light photography. In this post, I talk about the craziness surrounding ISO settings, how ISO actually affects exposure and how to find the optimal ISO setting on your camera for astrophotography.

Introduction

This article is the first of three articles in the Astrophotography 101 course about optimizing exposure. Futures articles on shutter time and aperture f/number will follow. Learning how to optimize exposure settings is one of the most helpful skills when attempting astrophotography. “What exposure settings should I use?” is probably the most common question I get. For beginners who are new at trying astrophotography with their regular digital camera and lens, I usually recommend starting with my Milky Way Exposure Calculator. That calculator will provide an excellent starting point when making your first attempts at shooting the night sky.

Once you’re comfortable making your first exposures, the next thing I recommend learning about exposure is how to optimize your ISO setting. That’s what this article is all about. To begin, here are a couple of glossary items that will hopefully help:

ISO

In digital photography, ISO is a standard (specifically ISO 12232:2006) for exposure brightness developed by the the International Standards Organization (ISO). Different camera sensor models have different sensitivities so we need some way to correlate them so like exposures yield like brightnesses. Some people pronounce each letter (aɪ-es-o) but I think it’s easier to just say it like a word (aɪso).

Signal

Signal is the part of the photograph that we want. Light is signal. Signal is the image. Without the signal (without light), we can have no image. The more light that we can gather, the more signal we have. In general, the more signal, the higher the quality of the photo.

Noise

Noise is the part of the photograph that we do not want. Noise is interference appearing as speckled grain that obscures the signal and thus the details of the photograph. Noise is usually generated by heat or imperfections in the behavior of the electronics of our digital cameras. Some noise is random with every shot (shot noise) and some noise is produced consistently by the camera’s sensor (upstream read noise) or produced by the electronics after the sensor’s signal has been amplified (downstream read noise). In general, the more noise, the lower the quality of the photo.

Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR)

The ratio of signal to noise in an image. The higher the signal-to-noise ratio, the higher the quality of the image. More light = more signal = good. More noise = bad. Collecting more light is the best way to increase signal-to-noise ratio.

Dynamic Range

The full range of light of a scene, from the darkest darks to the brightest brights. A high dynamic range scene has extremely bright highlights (such as the sun) and extremely dark darks (such as a fully shadowed black rock). A low dynamic range scene has relatively uniform light across the scene where the brightest parts of the image are not much brighter than the darkest parts of the image. Cameras only capture a limited dynamic range of light. If the dynamic range of a scene is high enough, anything outside the range of the camera’s sensor will either be blown out to pure white (in the case of very bright areas) or crushed to pure black (in the case of very dark areas). In general, a camera sensor capable of capturing a higher dynamic range of light is more desirable.

A disclaimer: I’m an engineer, but I’m formally and primarily trained in mechanical engineering. I have some relevant experience, but electrical and computer engineering isn’t my main mode of expertise. My intention with this article is to simplify these concepts in a way that hopefully makes sense to a larger, non-technical audience. If you’re familiar with this topic and you see any glaring mistakes in this article, please feel free to let me know.

Also, all of the points made in this article apply to RAW image files. It’s very important to shoot astrophotos in RAW format to preserve the best data collected by the sensor. Don’t start complaining when you try any of the tests in this article on your JPEGs. Also, much of the benefit of optimizing ISO selection applies primarily to low-light shooting (like astrophotography) where we have a relatively small amount of signal competing with the various noise sources that encroach upon our photographs.

ISO is Amplification or Gain

It’s a (very) common misconception that increasing ISO increases the sensitivity of a camera sensor. ISO doesn’t change sensitivity. Increasing ISO simply increases the brightness of a photo by amplifying the sensor signal. In the electronics world, amplification is sometimes called “gain.” Like we can “gain” weight if we increase our eating, we can “gain” brightness if we increase our ISO.

ISO doesn’t change sensitivity.

ISO in no way affects how much signal (light) the camera can collect. If we actually want more sensitivity with a camera, we need to either increase shutter time or aperture size (lower the f/number).

Higher ISOs Don’t Increase Noise

OK, to the main point: Higher ISOs won’t increase the visible noise in a photo.

Read that again, realize that it contradicts what you probably think you know about ISO and then let me elaborate:

All other things being equal, a higher ISO will do the following:

A higher ISO will increase the brightness of an image

A higher ISO will decrease the total dynamic range of the image

And, in many cases (like astrophotography), a higher ISO will actually decrease the visible noise

OK, I know what you’re thinking: “How come when I use a higher ISO, I get more noise?!” Here’s why:

For most imaging situations, photographers will usually use P (Program), A/Av (Aperture Priority/Aperture Variable), or S/Tv (Shutter Priority/Time Variable) modes on their camera. In these exposure modes, using a higher ISO setting will result in an image with more relative noise. What most people don’t realize is that the increase in noise is not because of the increase in ISO. The increase in relative noise when using a higher ISO in an automatic exposure mode (like P, A/Av or S/Tv) is actually due to the reciprocal decrease in shutter time or the decrease in aperture size as a result of using an automatic exposure mode. Most people are misattributing the increase in noise to the ISO when it’s actually caused by lower signal-to-noise ratio due to the shutter or aperture.

When setting a higher ISO on one of these autoexposure modes, the camera tries to achieve a neutral exposure and compensates for the increase in ISO by decreasing the amount of light entering camera. This reduction in light is done automatically by the camera by either decreasing the time the shutter is open (when in A/Av mode) or by using a higher f/number and thus decreasing size of the lens aperture diaphragm and letting in less light at a time (when in S/Tv mode), or by a combination of both (when in P mode).

So a reduction of light by the shutter or the aperture is the reason that the image appears noisier. It’s not noisier because of the higher ISO. This reduction of light is a reduction of signal and a reduction of signal yields an overall lower signal-to-noise ratio and thus a noisier photo.

How Do Shutter, Aperture and ISO Affect Noise?

A simple comparison test can show that relative noise levels are primarily affected by shutter and aperture and not affected nearly as much by ISO. In these tests, all settings are kept identical except the one that we wish to test which is adjusted by two stops. Then, in post processing, the images are equalized in brightness and compared.

Here’s what one of my complete test image looks like. It’s a RAW shot of Orion from a city suburb, made on a Sony a7S (my review) with the Zeiss 55mm/1.8 (also my review) lens:

How Shutter Time Affects Noise

8s, f/2.8, ISO 3200

4s, f/2.8, ISO 3200 (+1 stop in post)

2s, f/2.8, ISO 3200 (+2 stops in post)

Conclusion: shorter shutter time = less signal-to-noise ratio = noisier photo

How Aperture (f/number) Affects Noise

8s, f/2.8, ISO 3200

8s, f/4.0, ISO 3200 (+1 stop in post)

8s, f/5.6, ISO 3200 (+2 stops in post)

Conclusion: higher f/number = less signal-to-noise ratio = noisier photo

How ISO Affects Noise

8s, f/2.8, ISO 3200

8s, f/2.8, ISO 6400 (-1 stop in post)

8s, f/2.8, ISO 12800 (-2 stops in post)

Conclusion: higher ISO ≠ more relative noise

So of the three tests on my Sony a7S, shutter speed and aperture very obviously directly affect the apparent levels of noise in the photograph while ISO has nearly no effect. This is completely contrary to what many people would expect when they think about higher ISO.

In low-light photography, there is one aspect of ISO that can greatly affect the amount of perceived noise for any given ISO setting: downstream electronic noise. Let’s see how different types of cameras can be affected by downstream electronic noise.

ISO-Invariance and Downstream Electronic Noise

There are variations from sensor to sensor and camera model to camera model in how ISO affects low-light images. Understanding how your camera sensor behaves can help you find the optimal ISO setting for astrophotography. There are two fairly common configurations that we see in most modern digital cameras so we can split most cameras into one of two camps, ISO-variant and ISO-invariant.

ISO-Variant Cameras

Cameras use varied levels of analog amplification to adjust ISO. In a simplification of this case, the amplifier boosts the electronic voltage readout from the sensor by 2x for each ISO: 100, 200, 400, 800, 1600 and so on. Higher ISO means more amplification of the sensor output data.

After the sensor data is amplified by the ISO, it’s sent through some (downstream) electronics (such as an analog to digital convertor) to ultimately change our data from voltages into a digital file of numbers that’s readable by a computer. One of the distinct characteristics with ISO-variant cameras is higher contribution of noise from these downstream electronics.

If there is relatively little signal to begin with (e.g. in low-light situations), the lower ISO settings might not apply enough amplification for the voltages of the sensor data to overcome the contribution of electronic noise made by the downstream electronics. That means that in low-light situations like astrophotography, ISO-variant cameras will actually show more noise at low ISO settings and less noise at higher ISO settings. The Canon EOS 6D, still one of my favorite choices for a DSLR for astrophotography, is highly ISO-variant and actually shows its best low-light noise performance at ISO 6400 and higher!

Most Canon DSLRs are highly ISO-variant. There are a few exceptions to the Canon lineup that are not as ISO-variant including the new Canon EOS 5D Mark IV and the Canon EOS 80D.

ISO-Invariant Cameras

ISO-Invariant cameras have lower downstream read noise such that in low-light shooting conditions, the signal to noise ratio stays more constant as ISO settings change. In a simplification of this case, the sensor data is already amplified above the minimal contribution of downstream read noise sources before being converted to a digital signal. The result is a camera with low ISOs that tend to have less shadow noise and less of a variation between ISO settings. Most of these types of cameras are considered relatively ISOless or ISO-invariant. One camera that shows a great example of ISO-invariance is the Fujifilm X-T1. An example of the X-T1’s ISO-invariance test is available at the end of the article.

Notes and Exceptions

Okay, it’s not all black and white: many ISO-variant cameras eventually act like an ISO-invariant camera above a certain high ISO setting. Above some threshold ISO, these cameras fully overcome their noisy downstream electronics and show minimal difference in signal-to-noise ratio with higher ISOs. Most Canon cameras act this way above about ISO 1600. Knowing what that threshold ISO setting is can help us achieve the best low-light performance.

Similarly, many ISO-invariant cameras may have one or two distinct jumps in gain that will affect the overall read noise contribution to the image. In this case, there may still be a threshold ISO above which it is beneficial to shoot in low-light conditions. The Sony a7S acts this way with changes from approximately ISO 100 to 200 and 1600 to 3200. The Sony a7S’s best low-light performance is actually around ISO 3200 and above. Otherwise, the differences between ISO settings in low-light conditions on the a7S is relatively minimal.

Ultimately, both configurations achieve the same goal of brightening the photo to correspond with the particular ISO setting but the end result can be quite different, especially when shooting in low-light scenarios. ISO-invariance is a distinct enough trait in the behavior of a camera that dpreview.com has added an ISO-invariance test to most of their latest camera reviews. I personally think it’s very helpful to know how a camera acts in order to find out where it will perform best in low-light photography.

ISO vs. Dynamic Range

One of the distinct negative aspects of using too high of an ISO is reduced dynamic range. The more that we amplify the data that makes up a digital image, the more that we risk brightening it so much that it blows out the brightest parts of the image to pure white and loses detail in those parts of the image.

In the dynamic range test below, I made exposures of the star Antares at the highest ISO settings of my Sony a7S using the same exposure settings and varying only the ISO. As the ISO increases, the star appears to get larger because it’s being gradually more and more overexposed with each higher ISO. In practice, with the Sony a7S, the reduction in dynamic range doesn’t become too much of an issue until about ISO 51200 and higher but the difference in each stop is still apparent.

As a side-note, notice how similar most of the ISO settings between 1600 and 204800 look to each other in terms of noise, especially relative to the Canon EOS 6D sample above. The Sony a7S is a fairly, although not completely, ISO-invariant camera.

In my experience, except for the brightest stars, blowing out any part of an astrophoto to the point where we’re losing a lot of data is very, very rare. The bigger risk of using too high of an ISO in landscape astrophotography occurs when there is a larger, brighter (usually artificial) light source in view of the shot such as a street lamp, light pollution from a nearby town or your buddy’s headlamp.

Since we lose a little bit of highlight data with each higher ISO, choosing the optimal ISO for astrophotography is a little bit of balancing act between using a higher ISO for better noise performance (especially in the case of an ISO-variant sensor) or a lower ISO for better dynamic range.

Finding the Optimal ISO for Astrophotography: The ISO-Invariance Test

Stand back, we’re going to try science! In order to find the best ISO to use for astrophotography, I recommend doing an ISO-invariance test. Most of the samples shown in this article up to this point were made with an ISO-invariance test. It’s a super easy test to run: all we need to do is to take about 7-10 RAW photographs, one at each whole-stop ISO and then we match the exposure brightnesses in post processing. This test is easier to perform in a low-light scenario so I recommend doing this test outdoors at night or in a dimly lit room. Maybe make it an astrophotography trip.

If you’re performing this test while shooting the dark night sky, use my Milky Exposure Calculator to determine the shutter time and aperture setting. If doing the test in a dimly lit room, first use your camera’s (P) Program exposure mode at ISO 3200 to determine your shutter time and f/number.

Example: Canon EOS 700D

For my example, I’ll be testing out the Canon EOS 700D/T5i. Here’s a summary of the test:

Shoot in dark conditions: a dimly lit room or outdoors at night

Shoot in RAW file format!

Use (M) manual exposure mode

Set “daylight” white balance (just so it doesn’t drift)

Disable all forms of noise reduction (Long Exposure NR, High ISO NR)

Shoot one exposure at each whole stop ISO (100, 200, 400, 800, etc.)

Keep all other settings the same, change only ISO

Match exposures in post processing and compare

For my test on the T5i, here’s what the complete images looked like with the crop of the test area highlighted. I cropped the results of the test to a small area that included some midtones and some shadows.

Straight out of the camera, the crops of the RAWs looked like this:

In terms of noise, this comparison is deceiving because the brightnesses don’t match between exposures. In order to level the playing field, we need to match the brightnesses. To do so, I used Exposure adjustment slider in Adobe Lightroom to match all of the exposure brightnesses to the ISO 3200 exposure. The ISO 100 image was pushed all the way to the max +5EV setting on the Exposure slider, the ISO 200 +4EV, the ISO400, +3EV and so on…



Here’s the complete summary of how we match all the exposure brightnesses in Adobe Lightroom.

ISO 100 gets pushed +5EV

ISO 200 gets pushed +4EV

ISO 400 gets pushed +3EV

ISO 800 gets pushed +2EV

ISO 1600 gets pushed +1EV slider

ISO 3200 has no adjustments made

ISO 6400 gets pulled -1EV

Another way to do this in Adobe Lightroom is to select all of the exposures, then highlight the ISO 3200 exposure and select Photo > Develop Settings > Match Total Exposures or press Command+Option+Shift+M (Ctrl+Alt+Shift+M).

Once equalized, here’s what the exposures look like:

Upon comparison of the exposures, it’s immediately apparent that the Canon EOS 700D/T5i is not completely ISO-invariant. It appears as if that the camera reaches its best low-light performance at ISO 1600 and higher. ISO 1600, 3200 and 6400 look almost identical meaning that the 700D might be ISO-invariant from ISO 1600 upwards. Below ISO 1600 is a different story: As the ISO lowers, image quality degrades until the point of being nearly unusable at ISO 100. In order to preserve some dynamic range, but still get the best low-light performance on the 700D, it’s clear from the results of the test that ISO 1600 is the optimal setting.

Example: Fujifilm X-T1

Just for comparison, I ran a separate ISO-invariance test on my Fujifilm X-T1, this time at 30 seconds and an aperture of f/2.8. The results are distinctly different from the Canon.

The difference is that there is no difference… between the ISO 200 setting (the lowest it goes on the X-T1) and the ISO 6400 setting, noise levels are identical. This means that the Fujifilm X-T1 is completely ISO-invariant. The noise levels across the ISO range don’t change in the slightest. This means that it doesn’t really matter which ISO you use on the Fujifilm X-T1 and the optimal setting might even be ISO 200 in order to preserve dynamic range.

That said, there’s also a little bit of impracticality if attempting to shoot astrophoto at ISO 200 as the image preview on the back of the camera would be very dark and evaluation of other important factors like focus and composition would be difficult at ISO 200. Luckily, we’re usually not risking too much dynamic range by bumping ISO up to a moderately high level, assuming there are no bright artificial light sources in the photo. So using ISO a slightly higher ISO might be the more practical choice, keeping in mind our tolerance for reduced dynamic range.

Conclusion

Contrary to popular belief, higher ISOs don’t create more noise and using a higher ISO can actually be beneficial when shooting in low-light scenarios, especially on cameras with ISO-variant sensors. Run an ISO-invariance test on your camera to determine the best ISO setting to use when shooting astrophotography. ISO behavior varies from camera model to camera model and testing out each ISO setting can help determine the best ISO to use for the best noise performance in your astrophotography.

It’s important to understand that ISO-variance or invariance doesn’t necessarily make a camera better or worse at low-light, it’s just different. Knowing how a camera behaves is an important step to achieving the best image quality.

More and more cameras manufacturers tend to be making their cameras more and more ISO-invariant, as they develop sensor technology with reduced downstream read noise and improved dynamic range at low ISO settings.

Do you know which ISO on your camera gives the best low-light performance? Do a test to find out!

Where to Buy Equipment

I personally buy almost all of my equipment through B&H or Amazon. We are a participant in the Amazon Services LLC Associates Program and the B&H Affiliate Program, both are affiliate advertising programs designed to provide a means for us to earn fees by linking to Amazon.com and B&H affiliated sites. As the largest online retailers in the US, they both have an excellent return policy and they usually have the lowest prices for camera gear anywhere online. If you are considering buying any equipment, consider buying through the affiliate links on this page. You won’t pay anything extra but Lonely Speck will receive a small commission (usually 2-4%) to help run the website.

Learn Astrophotography

This article is part of Astrophotography 101, my growing series of lessons on astrophotography. It’s completely free for everyone. All of the lessons are available on the Lonely Speck Astrophotography 101 page for you to access at any time. Enter your email and whenever we post a new lesson or blog post, you’ll receive it in your inbox. We won’t spam you and your email will stay secure. Furthermore, updates will be sent out only periodically, usually less than once per week.

Join 9 343 other subscribers.

Help us help you!

Believe it or not, Lonely Speck is my full-time job. It’s been an amazing experience for us to see a community develop around learning astrophotography and we’re so happy to be a small part of it. I have learned that amazing things happen when you ask for help so remember that we are always here for you. If you have any questions about photography or just want to share a story, contact us! If you find the articles here helpful, consider helping us out with a donation.

Once again, the biggest contribution comes from the use of our affiliate links. When you buy through the links on Lonely Speck, it costs you nothing extra, but we will receive a small commission to help run the site.

Thanks so much for being a part of our astrophotography adventure.

-Ian

*This article was edited on March 20, 2017. A previous version of this article incorrectly characterized certain aspects of ISO-invariance. This point has been corrected.Ian Norman joined Aaron King and Brendon Porter on the Photog Adventures Podcast Episode 22 to talk about astrophotography, light pollution, Milky Way panoramas and timelapse.

Introduction

Aaron and Brendon’s Photog Adventures blog follows their photography adventures around the beautiful state of Utah and beyond. They have excellent blog posts, podcasts and videos that take us through their experiences learning and growing with their landscape photography. I have especially enjoyed listening to the Photog Adventures Podcast and watching their YouTube channel of in-the-field videos of their photography.

I’m currently learning how to make my own vlogs and seeing Brendon’s and Aaron’s adventure vlogs has been a great source of inspiration. I was very happy when I was approached by Aaron to join them on their podcast. Check out the full conversation about astrophotography, light pollution, Milky Way panoramas and timelapse below:

Check out Photog Adventures

If you haven’t already, check out all of Aaron and Brendon’s blog posts, podcasts and videos at Photog Adventures.

Learn Astrophotography

Did you enjoy the podcast? Learn more about astrophotography! Astrophotography 101 is completely free for everyone. All of our lessons are available on the Lonely Speck Astrophotography 101 page for you to access at any time. Enter your email and whenever we post a new lesson or blog post, you’ll receive it in your inbox. We won’t spam you and your email will stay secure. Furthermore, updates will be sent out only periodically, usually less than once per week.

Join 9 343 other subscribers.

Help us help you!

Believe it or not, Lonely Speck is a full-time job. It’s been an amazing experience for us to see a community develop around learning astrophotography and we’re so happy to be a small part of it. I have learned that amazing things happen when you ask for help so remember that we are always here for you. If you have any questions about photography or just want to share a story, contact us! If you find the articles here helpful, consider helping us out with a donation.

The biggest contribution comes from the use of our affiliate links. When you buy through the merchant links on the articles on Lonely Speck, it costs you nothing extra, but we will receive a small commission to help run the site.

Thanks so much for being a part of our astrophotography adventure.

-IanMy name is Scott Davenport, and I’m a landscape photographer. And I’m part of a crazy lot. I had this realization during a sleep deprived afternoon. My hazy mind was trying to get me through the rest of the day. It was also trying to comprehend how I arrived at the miserable state I was in.



It wasn’t hard to come 5 reasons why we landscape photographers definitely have a screw loose.

Reason 1. We Work Crazy Hours

Good light happens when it happens. Unless you live at the extreme upper or lower latitudes of our planet, that means sunrise and sunset. Sunrise shots are rough if you like sleep. A 5 AM sunrise might mean getting up at 2 AM to reach a location. On the good days, we get 30 minutes of excellent light on either side of sunrise. Then trudge out of wherever it is we trudged in. We’ve put in a full 8 hour day before most folks have had their second cup of coffee.

Getting to that sunrise location might include a significant hike. In utter darkness. Over uneven terrain. On a narrow path along a cliff edge. In coyote or bear country. That’s a smart place to be when you’re half awake, right?

The sunset shoots don’t deprive us of sleep. Instead, they deprive us of food. While most others are enjoying dinner and drinks, we are laden with gear and out at a location. Our stomachs remind us how long ago lunch really way. And our tongues promises to declare mutiny if we reach for another energy bar.

What about astrophotography? The best of both worlds. We are sleepy and hungry. And usually cold. If you’re a night owl, maybe you’re just hungry and cold. It’s kinda scary, too. Every stray sound is surely a wild animal that wants to eat us.

Reason 2. We Travel Vast Distances for Brief Moments

Landscape photographers will travel hundreds or thousands of miles for brief moments of light. That travel may include multiple planes, trains, and cars. Throw in a physically exerting hike in extreme cold or hot temperatures… you get to wondering pretty quickly “Why am I doing this?” That’s of course if we have the mental capacity to compose a sentence due to the sleep deprivation.

Did I mention we are carrying some serious gear all the way? Good glass is heavy. Solid tripods are heavy. Of course, we have a backup camera body. You brought water and energy bars, right? Water is heaviest when it’s not in our bodies. Surprisingly heavy. Depending on the weather, we might also be hauling camping gear.

Astrophotography is almost a guarantee of a long day’s journey. We have to get well outside of any city for a dark sky. And I use the term “city” loosely. The lights of a small town are enough to ruin a night sky photo.

Have you ever felt you’ve found The Middle Of Nowhere? I have. I also think landscape photographers are mapping the areas of the planet not covered by mobile phones. I’ve pretty sure I’ve found half of the 3% of the United States not covered by AT&T.

Reason 3. We Get Uncomfortable for Our Photos

Getting out of bed and getting to the location is just the beginning. We want unique angles and strong compositions. We want our own unique take on the landscape before us. Sometimes we push ourselves hard to achieve that.

As a seascape and water lover, that means getting wet. To capture the photo above, I was in rushing ocean water with surges about thigh deep. I was wearing denim. Why? It was January. It was cold on land. It was raining just 40 minutes before I took the photo. I hadn’t planned to get in the ocean that morning. However, that’s where the photo was. I left cold and damp (and grinning).

The truly dedicated spend several days off the grid for the epic photo. Bug bites. Inclement weather. Blisters. Sunburn. Cuts. Scrapes. Standing still. Yeah… standing still. That’s a lot harder than it seems. We find a perch that has the composition we want, set up all the gear, and… wait. Sometimes we wait hours for the light to be just so. I have a deeper appreciation for the unsung folks in museums, banks, and shops that simply stand the majority of their day.

Reason 4. We Invest Hours in a Single Frame

The planning, travel, and field time alone are hours of time invested in a photo. There is a bunch of learning we do up front. Countless hours spent learning our camera system. We toil over endless frames to determine the sharpest focal lengths and apertures – for every one of our lenses. We learn filter systems and specialty gear, too.

For our very best work, we invest another large chunk of time in front of our computers post processing. We pixel peep. We root out dust spots. We squint as we adjust tone, color, contrast, and sharpness. We selectively brush in effects. We mask. We unmask. We round trip through plug-ins. We blend layers. We retouch again.

How many post processing tools have you learned over the years? I can rattle off close to a dozen without breaking a sweat.

Reason 5. We Can’t Wait to Do It Again

After the planning, the learning, the traveling, the hiking, the sore muscles, the cuts, the bruises, the joys, the disappointments – the hours invested in a single frame… we cannot wait to head out again for another adventure. When the soreness has left our bodies and the chill has left our bones, we begin planning again. The cycle repeats.

Even after the most dreadful shoot that tests our will and yielded no keeper shots, in a few days we want to try again. Perhaps it’s the chase of the next great photo is the thrill. The next amazing frame is just around the next bend in the trail, over the next peak, around the next rock.

I Wouldn’t Have It Any Other Way

Landscape photography is a labor of love. Outings can take days, weeks or even months of planning. Our muscles ache from an arduous journey to reach our chosen location. Mother Nature may or may not cooperate. Some days we leave with no photographs to show for our efforts. Although I’ll argue we always leave a shoot with something more. Experience matters in my book.

Landscape photography has hurdles and challenges – like any genre of photography, really. There are pain points. A hefty investment of time is required. It takes focused effort to learn the craft and create a great photo.

We are landscape photographers. We are crazy. We may be certifiably mental. We are genuinely nutty. And I wouldn’t have it any other way.

About the author: Scott Davenport is a landscape photographer and photo educator based in San Diego, California. The opinions expressed in this article are solely those of the author. You can find more of his work and writing on his website, blog, Instagram, Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube. This article was also published here.Landscape photographer Thomas Heaton has set aside his gear for a moment to lay down some words of wisdom in this 11-minute video. In it he presents 5 great tips on how to further your landscape photography career.



Tip 1: Quality Over Quantity

Only publish your best photos. Think of your favorite photographers, Heaton says. How many photos of theirs can you remember? By publishing only your best work, people know that when you put something out in to the world, you consider it to be quality.

Tip 2: Create More Than an Image

Think bigger than just one image. Standalone images can be powerful, but you should be thinking about the broader story behind your work. Publications don’t usually want just a single image, they want a series of images with text to create a story. By linking images together, you can create a feature that is much more likely to get published.

An additional tip: media outlets love anything to do with the weather. If you find yourself in some kind of unusual weather event, consider taking a series of images and submitting it to different publications. Heaton suggests Rex Features, Science Photo, and Bav Media as potential places to submit your photos.

Tip 3: Be Original

Find your style. Landscape photography is incredibly saturated, and your images need to stand out somehow. The most iconic locations have been shot to death. As Heaton says, finding a way to take original images is the greatest challenge in landscape photography today.

Tip 4: Don’t Be Shy

Converse with other photographers. Contact them on social media, chat to them in the streets and get to know people. Networking is important – as other people see your name popping up more often, they’ll start to learn who you are and what you specialise in. If your work is good, this is how you will find jobs.

Further, if you can think of a collaborative idea that will benefit another photographer, consider reaching out to them, regardless of the size of their follower base. If it benefits them, they may just say yes. And if it benefits them, it is likely to benefit you too.

Tip 5: Manage Your Ego

You don’t know everything, you’ll never know everything, and you’ll never be the best. Accepting this and checking your ego will allow you to grow as a photographer and make you more open to trying new things.

Understand that you can’t please everybody and that you will always receive unproductive criticism from other people. Focus on what you love and your skills will develop naturally and in a style unique to yourself.

The world of landscape photography is hard to break in to, but with these tips from Thomas Heaton and a lot of perseverance, you may just be able to make a name for yourself. You can also find more of Heaton’s inspiring videos on his popular YouTube channel.Sometimes the excitement of another photographer seeking out the perfect landscape shot is all the inspiration we need to get outside ourselves. Join landscape photographer Adam Karnacz on a quest for the perfect sunset photo in this 12-minute vlog shot among the stunning vistas of the Lake District in Northwest England.



In landscape photography, sometimes nothing goes right, but then there are days like this one where everything falls in to place. Karnacz’s enthusiasm is infectious as he takes us with him to the top of Wall Crag, which overlooks the beautiful Derwent Water – the perfect setting for capturing a brilliant sunset.

His video is worth watching it in full, but there are 2 main shots that Karnacz takes along his route.

At 2:35, he stops on his way up the mountain for a shot overlooking the valley with gorsh bush and a pathway providing the perfect leading lines out and over the visa before him. The sun is high in the sky, so he uses wide bracketing (+3/-3) to capture the full dynamic range, enabling him to bring back some detail in the sky.

At 5:10, he reaches his main destination at the top of Wall Crag absolutely thrilled, with the weather coming in perfectly for his shot. Karnacz plays with a few different compositions, before settling on his final image:

All in all, it’s just a good, wholesome video about one man tackling the wilderness to get his photography mojo back. Check the full video out at the top – we hope you enjoy it as much as we did.

For more of Adam, check out his website and his YouTube channel First Man Photography, which has new videos up every Sunday.

Image credits: Photographs by Adam Karnacz and used with permission.My wife, Vicki, and I are full-time portrait and wedding photographers. But when we aren’t shooting these things, some of our favorite concepts are creating dramatic images of people in fantastic surroundings.

After years of doing this kind of work I now find it difficult to photograph landscapes without placing a human subject into the image. In fact, some of our work of this type has been featured on PetaPixel before.

We work with a lot of models and one of our all-time favorites is Sarah Maillet. When we heard she was going to Iceland for a visit I knew we would have to go as well. Sarah arranged for some gowns from some local stateside designers and we brought along some of ours, including a fabulous purple parachute dress from Alice Andrews Designs.

Along with Ryan McCabe, who provided invaluable support to the project, we set out on a two week photo excursion to some of Iceland’s most scenic locations.

First off, Iceland totally lives up to all the hype about its stunning landscapes and natural features. Everywhere you look there’s another amazingly beautiful waterfall, glacier, coastline, cliff, geothermal feature… you name it. It was almost overwhelming.

Every landscape photographer should plan a trip to the island at least once. We’ll be going back sometime, I’m sure of it.

There would be no shortage of great locations to put Sarah into. There was, however, a shortage of good weather. It rained every day, was unseasonably cold, and windy like you wouldn’t believe. In fact, some of Sarah’s poses became seated or relined poses when it proved impossible for her to stand!

We had to work really hard with the little spells of decent weather we got to create some worthwhile images. When the light was good though, it was very good.

Most images were taken with a mix of ambient light and strobes. We had a Phottix Indra 500 and several Nikon speed lights and often used the Indra 500 as a key light and a gridded speed light as a rim or accent light.

We were usually very limited in our choice of modifiers due to the high winds. We used two Nikon camera bodies and had lenses with focal lengths from 17mm all the way up to 500mm, and wound up using the whole range. We had a Nikon 200mm f/2.0 with, us which gave some fantastic results.

In case you can’t already tell, we would highly recommend a trip to Iceland for anyone interested. Air fares are cheap, flights are short, the people are friendly, and the country is spectacular. Each season has something special to offer and the logistics of a trip to the island are very straight forward.

We can’t wait to go back and are excited to see how great it can be there with better weather.

About the author: Jay and Vicki Philbrick are the team behind New Hampshire-based Philbrick Photography. Together, they create extreme and breathtaking portrait and wedding photography. You can find more of their work on the Philbrick Photography website, or by following them on Facebook.Lots of photo editing tutorials these days focus on one specific technique or edit—how to sharpen, or how to use the HSL tool, for example. But if you’re just starting out and you need a complete photo editing walkthrough, this tutorial will take you through a landscape photo edit from start to finish.

The tutorial was put together by photographer and filmmaker Peter McKinnon, and it can be broken down into three parts. In Part 1 (Start – 6:30) he shares some shooting and organizing tips you can use in the field and before you start editing your shots; in Part 2 (6:30 – 11:29) he takes you through an entire edit in Adobe Lightroom; and in Part 3 (11:29 – End) he takes you through a simple composite in Photoshop.

Not all three bits of the tutorial will apply to all viewers—I personally don’t like compositing elements into my landscapes, for example—but for someone just starting out, it covers a wide array of skills that will help get your photo editing off the ground. From getting started with rating photos to speed up your organizing, to basic image edits in Lightroom, to compositing in Photoshop if that’s something you want to try.

In the Lightroom section, McKinnon takes just 6 minutes to transform this photo from before to after:

And in Photoshop, he takes a rather standard shot of the Empire State Building and makes it just a touch more unique by adding some birds into the distance:

Check out the full video to see Peter work through these images live, and if you like this tutorial he’s got a lot more tips, tricks, tutorials, and inspirational messages to share on his YouTube channel.Hang around a group of landscape photographers long enough, and you’ll undoubtedly hear them talking about location scouting.

As the saying goes, understanding your subject better will improve your photographs of that subject. This is true for all kinds of photography (wildlife, architectural, portrait), and landscapes are no exception. Location scouting is the process of getting to know a particular landscape better, and is an important aspect of improving your landscape photography.

Before we talk about the nuts and bolts of how to conduct a proper location scout, let’s talk about various types of scouting and how each might bring a new perspective on an imperfect landscape.

Seasonal Scouting

Location scouting can be done long before the final photo is taken, sometimes even years. Any time I visit an area for landscape photography, I not only try to create the best photograph I can at the time, but I also imagine what the scene might look like during different times of the year.

Would that alpine meadow make the perfect foreground if only it were covered in wild flowers? Would those high mountain slopes pop if the aspen groves were in peak fall colors? Or if the tree line was blanketed with fresh snow?

Sometimes certain areas don’t look very good when I first visit, but in a different season, it would shine. In those cases, I make a mental note to come back in the season I think will show the area at its best, and do research to find out optimal timing for those seasonal elements.

But while I’m there, I can spend the time finding some of the shots that I will eventually take, even if it ends up being years later.

In this example, I first visited Ponytail Falls in Oregon’s Columbia Gorge in late Fall when the trees were bare and the moss on the river’s rocks was brown. It was still a pretty scene, but I knew that by visiting the same area in the Spring, I would green up the scene, and catch the falls at peak water flow.

I returned in Spring a couple years later to capture the photo above. Having already scouted the area and set up my shot made the return trip easy, as I had already formulated my target compositions in my mind.

Scouting for a Different Time of Day

Scouting an area for a future season is an extreme example of the practice. More often, we’re scouting in anticipation of different light on the scene.

Examples include visiting an area in the evening in anticipation of sunrise light, visiting midday while waiting for a beautiful sunset, or even waiting for a passing squall to reveal the full glory of its post-storm light show.

The photo above was taken on a trip to Grand Teton National Park with some friends. We scouted out a beautiful aspen grove in full Fall foliage with the Tetons rising behind; however, the sunset we were hoping for failed to materialize with heavy cloud cover all the way to the western horizon.

One of my friends suggested that although we had been targeting this location for a sunset, it might actually look spectacular at sunrise, as both the Tetons and the aspen grove would be front lit, slightly from the left. This would give definition to both the mountain and trees, and hopefully the sunrise would reveal some of that nice fall color throughout the grove.

With another visit in mind, I spent some time composing the shot above, in anticipation of sunrise light.

A couple of days later, I was rewarded by the preparation. We arrived just before dawn, and because of my earlier visit, I knew exactly what my composition would look like.

I quickly reset the shot based on GPS coordinates I took the previous visit. Using the exact spot I had set up in previously, as well as my reference shot from two days earlier, I took all the guesswork and stress of finding a shot that morning. Now it was just a matter of waiting for that beautiful light to brush through the aspen grove and make those yellows and oranges glow.

The On-Site Scout

The last type of scouting (and often the most frantic) that I do is what I call the “on-site.” This stems from me showing up unprepared, but still needing to quickly assess the area and find those great compositions that convey the essence of the area to the viewer.

This is much easier done when showing up for a sunset shoot, because you typically have a few hours of daylight in which to scout and set up your shot for the magic hour. On-sight scouting for a sunrise shoot is much more difficult, because even if you show up early, you have to wait until pre-dawn light before you can see the scene well enough.

It is very hard to create compositions in the pitch black of night!

The photo above was the result of one of those rare pre-sunrise on-sight scouts.

This shot was taken on my first trip to Death Valley National Park in the salt pan near Salt Creek. As I walked out onto the dried salt bed, I was surrounded by a thick salt crust. While this could make for an interesting foreground, it felt a little too overbearing to balance out the distant mountains; however, I had never been here before, and I didn’t quite know where to go.

As I saw the sunlight start creeping down the mountain face, a composition suddenly came to me. I wanted to contrast the bright red of the sunlit mountains with the blues of the still-shaded salt. Unfortunately, the thick crust of salt wasn’t working for me—I needed a much more delicate salt ridge pattern that gave more emphasis to the structure of the salt in between the ridges.

I quickly scanned the ground to the North and South, looking for a ground pattern that would help fulfill that vision. In the distance to the South, I saw something that might work but had only a few minutes to get there and set up before the light would flood the salt pan itself, ruining the color contrast effect.

I heaved my tripod (camera still attached) over one of my shoulders and ran as fast as I could across the pan. As I got close, I could see that this foreground would work out perfectly. Down went my tripod, already set up to the right height with the right, wide angle lens attached. Less than a minute later, the sun was just touching the lower slopes of the mountains, creating the beautiful color separation I was hoping for.

Scouting Techniques

Now that we’ve gone over the various types of location scouting, how does one actually go about doing this? You’ve arrived to a spot with several hours to spare, but now what?

For landscapes, there are three major elements I’m thinking about combining to create my composition—background, mid-ground, and foreground. The goal of scouting is to essentially find each of these elements that you want to add together to create a potential composition.

If the lighting is great while you’re there, wonderful. You may luck out and get your ideal photo of that location. But more often than not, it helps to think about other times or seasons in which to capture the scene.

1. Find your background

Backgrounds are easy—these are the huge dominant aspects of a landscape that typically draws you to the area in the first place.

In my typical compositions, this is usually a mountain, ocean, or waterfall. In the photo above, I was backpacking at Thousand Island Lake in the Ansel Adams Wilderness of the Sierra Nevada. Banner Peak is a dominant feature of that area and hard to ignore. I knew well before my trip that I wanted to capture this massif at sunrise. One element down.

2. Find your middleground

A middle ground typically ties your foreground and background together. Every landscape doesn’t need a middle ground, but I’m always assessing the area around me to find some element that will compliment, or draw the viewers’ eyes toward the background.

In this case, Thousand Island Lake itself was a no-brainer. It was a calm morning and Banner Peak cast a strong reflection, doubling the impact of the mountain. Now just to find a proper foreground to lead the viewers eye into the frame, and balance the strength of the mountain.

3. Construct your composition with proper foreground elements

The perfect foreground usually takes some searching to find—if you see a photographer wandering around looking at their feet, this is likely what they are doing.

If the angle of the lens is very wide, these foreground elements can sometimes be very small. You can often find several good options for foregrounds using the same middle and background elements. If so, shoot them all!

In this case, walking along the shoreline of the lake led me to a line of rocks breaking the reflection of the deep blue sky. Perfect elements to draw the viewers eye toward the reflection and up to the peak itself. With my shot in the bag, I headed back to camp for my morning coffee.

A Final Word – Virtual Scouting

Today’s information age brings us many advantages in learning about far away places. Although I think nothing beats learning about a location like visiting it yourself, I often utilize digital exploration techniques before I go somewhere to photograph it.

This helps me get my bearings and start to think about what kinds of photographs I’m going to attempt. While I won’t go into detail here, tools such as the Photographers Ephemeris, Google Maps 3D, and Google Maps photo overlay help in seeing what others have captured in the area, as well as planning your own trip.

I often shoot remote mountain locations while backpacking. Every time I pull into a new campsite, I drop my pack and start scouting the surrounding area, thinking about sunset that night, and also sunrise the next morning.

As I had never been to Davis Lakes in the Sierra Nevada before, I spent a good deal of time researching the area using the tools above. Based on the time of year and angle of the sunrise, I knew that sunrise light on the peak of Mt. Davis reflected in the lake would look fantastic.

When I arrived at my predetermined campsite, I set about finding a composition that would lead the viewer’s eye right up to that beacon of light in the frame. In order to do this, I had to pre-visualize what it might look like the following morning. The next morning, I emerged from my tent and set up in the exact spot I had scouted the previous evening. Now I just had to wait for the light until it was perfect.

Next time you think of a new area you’d like to photograph, spend time beforehand learning about that location. Give yourself plenty of time to explore the area on foot, setting up several potential shots that might work well in the right lighting conditions. Above all, if mother nature does not cooperate with your photo endeavor, don’t despair! Just chalk it up to a valuable scouting trip.

About the author: Hank Christensen is a freelance photographer specializing in bird, landscape, and adventure stock photography. His work has been published on the cover of Outdoor Photographer and Bay Nature, and you can see more of his photos on his website, blog, Instagram, and Facebook. This post was also published here.Seasoned landscape photographer Craig Roberts has some tips for the newbies out there, so get out your pen and pad and listen up: here are some top “Dos” and “Don’ts” for landscape photography.

Roberts covers a slew of topics in this 10 minute video. He starts with Location before moving on to Composition, Exposure, Depth of Field, Light, Filters, and a few other miscellaneous topics at the very end of the video.

And for each of these very important categories, Roberts dives into his own personal “dos” and “don’ts” that will help you become a better landscape photographer. We definitely suggest you check out the full video up top, because it’s impossible to summarize properly in a few bullet points, but here are the points in-summary, along with timestamps for reference.

Do shoot locally. 1:10

shoot locally. 1:10 Don’t automatically grab your widest lens. 1:59

automatically grab your widest lens. 1:59 Don’t shoot wide and then crop later. 2:24

shoot wide and then crop later. 2:24 Don’t think you need a bag full of lenses, the kit lens is just fine. 2:43

think you need a bag full of lenses, the kit lens is just fine. 2:43 Do create a picture with a foreground, midground, and background. 2:53

create a picture with a foreground, midground, and background. 2:53 Do experiment with different metering modes. 3:12

experiment with different metering modes. 3:12 Don’t automatically focus at infinity, Do focus 1/3 of the way up your frame. 4:10

automatically focus at infinity, focus 1/3 of the way up your frame. 4:10 Do occasionally try shooting wide open, with focus on the foreground. 5:43

occasionally try shooting wide open, with focus on the foreground. 5:43 Don’t only shoot sunsets and sunrises. 6:01

only shoot sunsets and sunrises. 6:01 Do use filters to balance the exposure between sky and land. 7:14

use filters to balance the exposure between sky and land. 7:14 Don’t use a 10-stop ND filter unless it’s actually necessary. 8:49

use a 10-stop ND filter unless it’s actually necessary. 8:49 Do invest in a good tripod. 9:20

invest in a good tripod. 9:20 Don’t worry about having the latest and greatest camera or lenses. 9:36

And that’s it! Like we said above, definitely check out the full video to hear each of these Dos and Don’ts properly elaborated on, and if you like what you see, subscribe to Craig’s YouTube channel, visit his website, or give him a follow on Instagram.

(via Reddit)Zen photography comes naturally with an empty mind. It’s both waiting for a moment where light, shape, and dynamics fall into place, and being devoid of planning in advance. Instead of checking the weather online before a shoot, you just venture out and essentially wing it. It’s all about being in the moment. As a landscape photographer, I want to share the ways of this minimalist sub-genre.



1. Negative Space

Although some might disagree, photography is much like painting. I really like the following analogy to help understand a primary difference between the two:

A painter stops adding paint strokes to an otherwise blank canvas before he decides his work is finished. A photographer instead, removes elements of an image until the canvas is essentially blank again. He decides when this process of removal is enough to produce a striking image.

That being said, I personally admire the stillness an image can conjure up. Unlike many other genres of photography, these images do not scream for attention. Instead, Zen-inspired photographs invite you to gaze upon them again and again. Their simplicity is often misleading as the longer you look at the image, the more shapes and patterns start to appear.

Negative space is the area that is particularly empty; without detail or subjects. It can be both really dark and extremely bright; as long as this area doesn’t ask for attention. A clear blue sky could be an excellent example of an area that’s without detail. The more negative space there is in an image, the more your subject will stand out.

2. Be a Square

Square compositions give an instant view of the content of the picture, even before you’d have to take in the frame first. With the width being equal to the height, the frame becomes neutral – as if it doesn’t exist at all. That makes the content of the frame more powerful.

An added benefit is the order the squares propose to an online gallery. As opposed to the soft and curved subjects in the pictures itself, such a gallery is very structured, since the pictures are placed along a grid. This paradox subconsciously makes you want to click the images.

3. Time Stretching

Long exposures smear clouds across the sky, reduce splashes of water to fine mist, and create a gentle background that makes a stark subject come out of the picture. Neutral Density (ND) filters help to reduce light, so you can expose an image even longer. A polarizer helps to reduce light up to three stops too, but you can always wait until dusk to increase the shutter speed naturally.

A bright sky can easily be toned down using a graduated neutral density (GND) filter, or bracketing multiple exposures. Don’t have a grad filter? Slide a matte black card or cloth in front of the lens while you’re exposing. Move it up and down the brightest part of the image about half the time it takes for your camera to capture the image.

This technique, known as the black card (or cloth) technique, is nearly as old as photography itself, and is a good alternative to bracketing multiple frames or spending money on graduated filters. It works by reducing even more light in the brightest part of the image if the dynamic range of the scene (shadows to highlights) is too much for the camera to correctly expose for. And it’s a fun way to keep yourself busy during an exposure that lasts several minutes!

4. Intentional Camera Movement

When there are no solid objects in the image, there is no need for sharpness. Sometimes images (especially seascapes in which only liquid and gaseous substances are captured) benefit from the added softness by panning the camera while exposing the image. When used correctly, this panning of the camera creates new textures and patterns, because you pan along with the flow of the water or clouds in the sky. This technique creates painterly images that are both unique and look alike at the same time. Use sparingly.

5. B&W and Monochrome

Black and white images are often times less blatant than their counterparts in color. Monochromes invite your to explore the image in another way. It’s physical as well. You must have heard somewhere (in biology class maybe) that the retinas in our eyes are made from different optical receptors; rods and cones. When the color sensitive cones do not receive color input, it comes down to the light-sensitive rods.

It’s a more primitive, even primeval way of observing the world around us, as rods go further back down the evolutionary path than cones do.

With digital black and white photography comes the task of converting your color images to monochrome. While I prefer Nik Silver Efex Pro for that task, Topaz B&W Effects is also often used to give photographers full control over how each color is converted to grayscale.

6. The Longer the Lens…

…the less is in the image. Again, it boils down to “Less is more.” Using a lens with a greater focal length from the same spot, yields a tighter crop that helps you to ask yourself what you want to show: What’s the most significant area of what the wide angle would capture?

7. Starting Out with Zen Landscape Photography

Are you not entirely sure how to start? Or maybe you’re bothered with the thought of ‘an empty mind.’ You can start by introducing Zen photography after you’ve shot your regular photography. Once you have captured what you came for, it’s much easier to let go and capture something as empty as your mind.

Furthermore, it’s better to have just one or two subjects/locations in mind to capture. This also helps to clear the mind and allowing you to focus. Stick to your format or technique, and learn to learn again. Much like a child who first picked up a camera.

Joyful things happen to those who are patient, so never rush the process. Landscape photography is about allowing plenty of time to pass and wait for that fleeting light. Stick to a location as well and make sure there isn’t anything that diverts your concentration or causes you to rush off.

Arrive early at a location and wait for conditions to become perfect, or as you envisioned. Don’t fret if that doesn’t happen though! In most cases, you can return to the scene. Sometimes even years after the original intent, but the result should be worth the effort.

I hope you’ve picked up some advice to start out in a new sub-genre of landscape photography.

For more inspiration of Zen-like imagery, find me on my website: Laanscapes.Photography.

About the author: Daniel Laan is a landscape photographer based in the Netherlands. In addition to being a full-time landscape shooter, Laan also teaches photography to students around the world. You can find more of his work on his website, Facebook, 500px, and Instagram.I had the good fortune of having a pre-production model of the Fujifilm GFX 50s to take with me to Norway in February of this year on my scouting trip with Discovery Photo Tours.

Since I was already bringing a lot of my X-Series gear with me, I wanted to keep my kit as light as possible and therefore only brought the GFX body, the extended grip, and the FUJINON GF32-64mmF4 R LM WR.

I had the chance to bring the other two lenses available at this time but since my focus was on more big picture wide angle shots, I chose the versatile zoom that has a range of 25-51mm in 35mm format equivalent. The other lens that I’m excited about is the yet to be released GF23mmF4 R LM WR. That will be a very welcome addition for travel and landscape shooters like me who are constantly looking for the widest lens possible to capture the incredible vistas we encounter on our journeys.

First, some history…

While a lot of people think that Fujifilm is “jumping into” the medium format arena out of the blue, those people would be dead wrong. The fact is that Fujifilm has a long and deep tradition of medium format cameras and lenses that they created under the Fujifilm name and also for Hasselblad.

Here’s a partial list of the Fujifilm medium format cameras that photographers have been using for decades:

Medium format film camera

Fujifilm GX680

The GX680 is a series of medium format SLR studio system cameras that uses 120/220 roll film in a 6×8 format and introduced by Fuji in 1989. It was replaced by the GX680 II in 1995. A third revision was released in December 1997 as the GX680 III. The system was officially discontinued in April 2010.

Fuji GX617

The Panorama GX617 is a medium format roll film panorama camera introduced by Fuji in 1993. It replaced the Fuji Panorama G617 released in 1985.

Fujica GW690

The Fujica GW690 Professional and the nine similar models that followed it are leaf-shutter fixed-lens rangefinder cameras for 120/220 film that Fuji brought out as successors to its interchangeable-lens Fujica GL690 and GM670 Professional models.

Fujica Six

The Fujica Six, a 6×6 folding viewfinder camera, was the very first camera to be produced by Fuji Photo Film. The first version came out in 1948, the last in 1953.

Fujicaflex

The Fujicaflex is a 6×6 TLR camera that uses 120 medium format roll film and introduced by Fuji in 1954. It uses a Fujinar 83mm f/2.8 3 group/5 element lens with a Seikosha Rapid shutter with speeds of 1 to 400 with a B setting as well.

Fujica GS645

The Fuji GS645 series of compact medium format cameras was released in the early 1980’s. They share a nearly identical body and available with fixed lenses of various focal lengths.

Medium format digital camera

Fujifilm GX645AF

The Fujifilm GX645AF is an autofocus medium format camera introduced in 2003 by Fujifilm. It was discontinued in 2010. It was also known as the Hasselblad H1. It appears identical to the H1 with the only difference being the darker coloured plastic of the body. All other features are identical to the H1 and the GX645AF uses the same accessories of the Hasselblad H cameras.

Surprised? You’re not alone. Fujifilm has a deep heritage not just in film but in camera and lens manufacturing for stills, broadcast, and cinema.

Now that we’ve established that Fujifilm is a serious player in the medium format game, let’s jump to the newest offering…

Fujifilm GFX 50S| First Impressions

I’ll be honest, I’m not the most technical of photographers, and I have no problem saying that. I see a lot of photography sites that review gear where they talk about very technical things that in the long run, don’t really matter to me. They also showcase sub-par images to extol the virtue of the gear they are reviewing or, in some cases, to bash it.

Now, you don’t need out of this world imagery to show how sharp a lens is or the demonstrate noise at different ISO settings. But what I’d like to talk about here are a few of the important things that are meaningful to me in the work that I do.

Bear in mind, I had the camera for a week, and I was working on a scouting trip for Discovery Photo Tours. That means I had limited time with what is turning out to be the camera of the year for so many people. I’m looking forward to the next time I can get my hands on a GFX 50s for a longer period of time, and at that time I’ll expand on my first impressions.

Dynamic Range

For travel and landscape shooters like me, dynamic range that a camera sensor can capture in one frame is a vital tech spec. I personally want to be able to have the option to recover highlight and shadow detail as much as possible in all my images, and like most other medium format cameras, the Fujifilm GFX 50S delivers better dynamic range than the DSLR and mirrorless competition.

The GFX boasts 11.9 stops of dynamic range! In independent tests, the GFX compares very favorably with all rivals in dynamic range comparisons. When coupled with the fact that we’re dealing with larger pixels and the fact that the GFX blows away the mirrorless, DSLR and medium format competition at high ISO, colour me impressed.

You’ll perhaps note that these independent tests show slightly lower values of dynamic range than the manufacturers. For example, Fujifilm claims 14 stops of dynamic range for the GFX and PhaseOne claims 15 for the listed IQ3 at native ISO of 100.

Dynamic Range Testing Source: Photons to Photos

ISO sensitivity

For a medium format camera, the GFX boast exceptional range in ISO speeds. The default ISO is 100 and goes up to 12,800. The range can further be expanded to from 50 to a whopping 102,400. I’m looking forward to testing this out on future shoots where I’ll need higher ISO for night shooting, auroras, and astrophotography.

Camera Design

I’m torn… While I love the looks and feel of the Fujifilm X-Series cameras and lenses, I’m not so sure I love the look of this camera as much.

That being said, there was a lot of thought put into the design of the GFX system and I know some of the design team. These folks are incredibly meticulous in making sure that there is a nice harmony between form and function. The more I used the GFX, the more I started to like the design.

Here’s what I like about the design :

The dual tilting LCD screen… Why all serious cameras don’t have this is beyond me

Size… Similar in size to a Canon or Nikon pro DSLR

The LCD screen is brilliantly sharp and crisp

The V/H articulating viewfinder… Well done Fujifilm

Balance… The camera feels extremely well balanced when hand holding and that’s both with and without the battery grip

Two big manual dials for ISO and shutter speed

Touch screen… yes!

And what I don’t like :

No mechanical shutter release like in the X series cameras

The small thumb stick seems tiny on this bigger camera, and a more robust version would have been welcome

The “retro” look to the camera does not fit as well on the larger GFX as it does on say the X-Pro 2 or X-T2 but that’s simply aesthetics

The back “dial” or four-way pad could have been significantly larger in my opinion as it is challenging to manipulate whilst wearing gloves

Fujifilm GFX 50S Layout

Custom Function Buttons

Each of the ten Fn buttons can hold the following settings:

Exposure Comp.

Image Size

Image Quality

Raw

Film Simulation

Grain Effect

Color Chrome Effect

Dynamic Range

White Balance

Select C. Settings

Focus Area

Focus Check

AF Mode

Rapid AF

Face/Eye Detection

Self-timer

AE BKT Settings

Photometry

Shutter Type

ISO Auto Setting

Wireless Comm.

Flash Fn Setting

TTL – Lock

Modeling Flash

Mic Level Adjust

Preview DoF

Preview Exp./WB in Manual Mode

P/View Pic Effect

Histogram

Electronic level

AE Lock Only

AF Lock Only

AE/AF Lock

AF-On

Lock setting

Playback

Menu System & Features

Since I’m already a Fujifilm X-Series user, I was comfortable with the menu system out of the gate. One of my favourite things about the X-Series is the very intuitive menu system and therefore was happy to see most of the menu items the same or similar on the GFX.

Going through the whole menu system of any camera in a review would be overkill, but I’ll brush on a few of the features that I like best.

Shooting past 30 seconds without being in Bulb mode is now possible! I’ve been asking for this one for some time, and finally, Fujifilm delivers. Since I shoot a lot with ND filters, I’m often surpassing the thirty-second mark in my exposures. If I recall properly(I no longer have the camera), the GFX allows us to shoot up to thirty minutes now. Love this.

The menu can be accessed by using the touchscreen and buttons/dials.

The camera’s Q.menu can also be customized with frequently changed settings.

The customizable E-ink display “sub” menu on the top of the camera is clearly visible with vital information in both low light and bright daylight.

You can now bracket up to 9 frames continuously.

The GFX allows users to choose from the following ratios in camera:

Sensor

The GFX 50S has a 43.8×32.9mm 51.1 megapixel CMOS sensor that features an X Processor Pro image processing engine. The proprietary processor allows the GFX to render spectacular colour reproduction and utilize Fujifilm’s Film Simulation modes to its full advantage. Maximum resolution is 8256 x 6192 (51.1 MP, 4:3 ratio).

Pixels

I think it’s appropriate at this point to discuss the difference in pixels between the GFX and similar megapixel DSLR cameras.

As I’ve said above, I’m not the most technical of photographers, but this is a very important thing to consider if you’re looking for a large megapixel sized sensor…All pixels are not the same!

The pixel size of the Fujifilm GFX 50S sensor is 5.3nm. This is actually 1.7x bigger when compared to 50MP 35mm format sensor. Bigger pixels with more space between each pixel allow for crisper, sharper, more detailed image files when compared to a similar megapixel sized sensor on a DSLR.

Electronic Viewfinder and Optional Tilt Adapter

One very nice thing about this viewfinder is that it is detachable. That makes it easy to pack the camera away snugly and securely in smaller packs.

The EVF is crisp and clear, but I did notice some minor shimmer when shooting with autofocus. I chalked that up to very cold and windy conditions, but I will look for it again when shooting in a more hospitable climate.

Unfortunately, I was not given the tilt adapter to test on this shoot.

Shutter

Shutter speed

Mechanical Shutter

4sec. – 1/4000sec (P mode), 60 min. – １/4000 sec. (All modes)

Bulb mode (up to 60min), TIME：60min. – 1/4000sec.

Electronic Shutter*

4sec – 1/16000sec (P mode), 60min – １/16000sec (All modes)

Bulb mode (up to 60 min), TIME：60min. – 1/16000sec.

Electronic Front Curtain Shutter**

4sec. – 1/4000sec (P mode), 60 min. – １/4000 sec. (All modes)

Bulb mode (up to 60min), TIME：60min. – 1/4000sec.

Mechanical + Electronic Shutter

4sec – 1/16000sec (P mode), 60min – １/16000sec (All modes)

Bulb mode (up to 60 min), TIME：60min. – 1/16000sec.

Electronic Front Curtain Shutter** + Electronic Shutter

4sec – 1/16000sec (P mode), 60min – １/16000sec (All modes)

Bulb mode (up to 60 min), TIME：60min. – 1/16000sec.

Synchronized shutter speed for flash

1/125sec. or slower

Display

The GFX has a very large and extremely sharp rear 2.36M-dot LCD display that also acts as a touchscreen control panel with 100% coverage. The screen tilts in three directions (90°up – 45° down – and 60° to the right) which is ideal for photographers like me who shoot from all different heights and angles.

The touchscreen allows the user to control AF point selection, input characters, swipe through photos, make selections from the Q menu, and more.

Vertical Battery Grip

At first glance, the vertical battery grip looks odd but hen you actually hold the camera in your hands, you’ll see and feel why the Fujifilm design team made it like this—the camera is equally balanced when holding it either in vertical or horizontal positions.

All the buttons, thumbsticks, and dials that are easily accessible and ergonomically placed on the back of the camera for use in landscape position are also available in equally comfortable positions on the back of the battery grip. The other bonus is that you get to double your battery life with the extra battery that is housed in the grip.

One caveat, the extra battery does not come with the grip, you’ll have to purchase that separately.

Battery Life

The GFX uses a new rechargeable battery, the NP-T125. It is CIPA rated at 400 shots but in my experience in Norway, went well beyond that mark.

When using the battery grip that holds a second battery, I did not once run out of battery on all day shoots. That’s, of course, relative to how much you shoot but even when shooting 600+ images, I failed to drain even one of the batteries, and the temperature hovered around the -2°c to -10°c.

Autofocus

Did not use much… will report on this later.

Video

I’m not a video shooter and to be frank, this is not a camera for top notch 4k video.That’s totally okay with me.

Funny enough, the little sister to the GFX, the Fujifilm X-T2 is a monster when it comes to video and offers full 4K quality video as opposed to the GFX’s 1080p. Other limitations to the video on the GFX are a minimum ISO of 200, and for any serious video shooter filming in bright light, that can be annoying.

Time to look at a serious neutral density filter kit to fix that issue!

Image File Format

JPEG, 14-bit RAW (uncompressed or lossless compressed); RAW+JPEG; 24-bit TIFF (in-camera RAW conversion)

Lenses

Just like with cameras, Fujifilm has a rich legacy of producing some of the best lenses in the world for still, cinema, and broadcast cameras. Not only does Fujifilm make their own lenses for their Fujifilm branded cameras but they also make most of the lenses for the Hasselblad system.

Other companies also engage Fujifilm to white label produce their optics and then re-brand them as their own.

GF 32-64mm f/4 R LM WR

I only had the one lens in my kit while in Norway, the GF 32-64mm f/4 R LM WR lens. I enjoyed the lens, and it actually was nice to only have one lens to work with for a change. I’m used to having at least a super wide angle prime or a super wide zoom to work with, and the GF 32-64mm f/4 R LM WR was forcing me to look at the world in a different way this time. I’m thrilled with the results in more ways than one.

The clarity and sharpness of the files produced by this lens are some of the most detailed I have ever shot, and small JPGs on a blog post truly do not do the images justice. The images I was able to produce had remarkable edge to edge sharpness.

The lens construction consists of 11 groups and 14 elements; three aspherical elements, one Super ED element and one ED element, with a fluorine-coated front element.

I would have ben bothered by the f/4 maximum aperture if it was not for the fact that the GFX 50S works so well at higher ISO. When used, the AF worked well but I typically will manual focus my landscape images like I was shooting in Norway. To be fair, I did not test out the lens for night time shooting of stars or the awesome auroras we saw, so I’ll reserve my judgements for that on the next review.

At 1.93 pounds (875 grams) the lens is similar in size and weight to the 24-70mm f/2.8 offerings from Nikon and Canon.

There are three GF lenses available in Q1 of 2017 and three more announced for later in the year.

Available Q1 2017

FUJINON GF63mmF2.8 R WR – Standard Prime Lens

FUJINON GF32-64mmF4 R LM WR – Standard Zoom Lens

FUJINON GF120mmF4 R LM OIS WR Macro – Medium Telephoto Macro Lens

Available later 2017

FUJINON GF 23mm f4 R LM WR – Available mid-2017

FUJINON GF 110mm f2 R LM WR – Available mid-2017

FUJINON GF 45mm f2.8 R WR – Available late 2017

The new FUJINON GF Lenses—like their X Series counterparts—have an aperture ring, and have a new C (Command) Position on the ring that allows users to alternatively make aperture adjustments with the Command Dial on the camera body.

Fujifilm is claiming that the G mount lenses were built with future GFX models in mind with sensors up to 100 megapixels.

Conclusion

After spending a week with the GFX, I was left wishing I had another week to use it even more extensively. This was my first foray into the digital medium format camera world and the resulting images that I was able to produce make me look forward to the next time I can get one in my hands.

I have yet to see any other images that I have taken a look as sharp as those produced by the GFX 50S and, to me, that is what counts the most: the end result. The colour rendition is also superb, but I’m not surprised at that since I’ve been using Fujifilm’s X-Series of cameras almost from day one.

The camera is nearly as versatile as a DSLR or mirrorless camera, but no medium format camera is known to be made for action, sports, or photojournalism. That’s not what they are for. For photographers who are into landscape, fashion, portrait, commercial advertising, or fine art… this is your game changer.

When we look at the competition in the medium format world, the cost for comparable cameras and lenses can range from four to eight times the cost of the GFX. The GFX is also more hand holdable than the medium format competition and more ergonomic.

I’m not saying that this is an every person’s camera—far from it. The Fujifilm GFX 50S is revolutionary in terms of offering a fantastic new medium format camera system from a company that is at the forefront of mirrorless camera technology and lens manufacturing. The price of the GFX system is also groundbreaking, in that it finally makes medium format quality substantially more affordable to pro photographers and serious advanced enthusiasts.

Overall, the camera is well thought out and is perhaps the most versatile of all medium format cameras on the market today. The lens selection will hopefully grow rapidly such as we saw with the continuously growing X Series lens stable.

Aside from the Fujifilm accessories mentioned above, Fujifilm also offers the Fujifilm H Mount Adapter G for using Fujifilm-developed Hasselblad H-mount lenses on the GFX. Another exciting accessory available for the GFX is the View Camera Adapter G for studio photographers. Couple that with the Cambo ACTUS-GFX View Camera Body with Fujifilm GFX Bayonet Mount and you’ll have a top-notch studio bellows camera system at your disposal with full front tilt & swing and rear shift movements.

Other third party adapters will allow GFX owners to use their existing Canon, Nikon, Leica M, Mamiya, Pentax and other lenses. Just don’t expect the same quality from full-frame lenses on a medium format camera.

With a few exceptions (noted below in the cons section) this is one serious professional camera that I’m looking forward to using for years to come. No wonder that after the much-anticipated announcement of the Fujifilm GFX 50S at Photokina 2016 in Germany, the press dubbed the show “Fujikina”, and rightfully so.

Pros

Exceptional Raw and JPG image quality

Weather sealing is exceptional

Dual hinged tilting LCD allows usage in both portrait and landscape

Focus Peaking

AE Bracketing (2/3/5/7/9 frames) ±1/3EV – ±3EV, 1/3EV step

Exposures up to 30 minutes without cable release or intervalometer

Tons (ten) of customizable buttons that make the camera truly your own in terms of handling

In camera RAW processing

Easy to use WiFi

Mirrorless system and electronic first curtain shutter allows for less camera and shutter shake

Intelligent form fitting ergonomics

Touch screen LCD rear display

Super high resolution 51.4MP, 44 x 33mm sensor

Two AF joysticks (with optional vertical grip) makes it easy to select AF points

Classic ISO and shutter speed mechanical dials

Cons

Small joystick could have been significantly bigger to allow for easier control/li>

The boxy look to the camera was not what I had hoped for in a revolutionary camera system/li>

Lenses do not feel as solid as similar lenses in the X-Series/li>

Limited lens selections at launch/li>

No image stabilization/li>

No GPS built in/li>

Low flash sync speed/li>

No ISO 100 during video capture/li>

No dedicated exposure compensation dial/li>

Small buttons for a large body could have been bigger to allow for easier manipulation, especially when wearing light gloves

About the author: Ken Kaminesky is a commercial lifestyle and travel photographer, and co-founder of Discovery Photo Tours. To see more of his work, visit his website and blog, or give him a follow on Facebook and Instagram. This review was also published here.Bentley has captured what they’re calling “the world’s most detailed landscape photo”: a 57.7 gigapixel interactive ad stitched together from 1,825 individual frames captured from atop one of the tallest towers in Dubai.

This isn’t the first time Bentley has experimented with NASA technology and gigapixel photography. Their first interactive ad, captured in San Francisco, featured a 53-gigapixel photo that let you zoom all the way in to the stitching on a car seat that was driving across the Golden Gate Bridge.

But as impressive as that photo was, they really outdid themselves on this one. From an image of the whole Dubai Marina:

You can zoom into this little section:

And then keep on going until you’ve reached the hood decal of the new Bentley Flying Spur W12 S:

At its closest, all you can see is the decal:

According to the Daily Mail, the image was incredibly difficult to capture. The NASA-derived gigapixel camera system was suspended 264 metres (~866 feet) up the Cayan Tower, where it had to contend with “40-degree heat that created a haze and 25 km/h winds that threatened to disrupt stability.”

All of the source images took 48 hours to capture, and downloading the final stitched photograph took 18 hours.

The gimmick seems to have worked. No only are car lovers enjoying the ad, camera geeks are having a field day exploring the Dubai marina as well. To see the full, interactive ad for yourself, head over to the Bentley website by clicking here.

Hint: make sure you press the three lines in the top right and select “Explore the Image” to browse the full photo, not just zoom in on the Bentley.

(via Fstoppers)If you take a drive down the Gene Autry Trail in California sometime before April 30th, you’ll run into an unusual set of billboards. Rather than ads, you’re greeted by a landscape photograph that, for a fleeting moment as you drive by, will blend perfectly into the mountains in the distance.

Called Visible Distance, the billboards are actually an art installation by Jennifer Bolande, part of an outdoor exhibition of art installations for the not-for-profit charitable organization Desert X, which was photographed by Lance Gerber. Bolande photographed the landscapes behind the billboard, and then created the drive-by installation by turning the very concept of the billboard on its head.

“…at a certain point as one approaches each billboard, perfect alignment with the horizon will occur thus reconnecting the space that the rectangle of the billboard has interrupted,” explains the project description. “Within the desert empire of roadside signs, Bolande chooses to advertise the very thing so often overlooked. Looking up at the billboards our attention is drawn back to the landscape itself, pictured here as a stuttering kineasthetic of real and artificial horizons.”

Scroll down to see all the installations for yourself:

To learn more about Desert X, Visible Distance, or any of the other art installations created for the non-profit, visit the organization’s website by clicking here.

(via designboom via Fstoppers)

Image credits: Photographs by Lance Gerber, courtesy of the artist and Desert X.Marcus DeSieno’s Surveillance Landscapes are unlike any other landscape photography series you’ve probably ever seen. While most landscape shooters trek into the wilds, camera and tripod at the ready, DeSieno captured all of these images from the comfort of his own home… by hacking into security cameras.

Surveillance Landscapes was inspired, DeSieno says, by “the pervasive nature of our surveillance culture.” In an interview with DIY Photography, he says imagery like this is part of “an essential conversation in our post-Snowden world.”

“I am interested in widening the discussion past the notion of privacy,” he said. “How has this technology shaped us? In what ways has it shaped how we perceive the spaces around us? How has it confined us or conformed us? How has it altered our understanding of human geography?”

But while he could have hacked into the tens of thousands of unsecured nanny cams out there, intruding on people’s most personal and private moments, he decided to take a different approach. He hacked into cameras pointed at landscapes devoid of humanity instead.

“The melancholic images that I’m assembling speak to how this technology shapes our understanding of place,” he told DIYP. “[It] evokes conversations around power, ownership, and perhaps an intended dominance over the environment.”

Even if you ignore the message, however, the images seem almost otherworldly—like artsy pinhole photographs or hastily processed wet plate snapshots with all of their idiosyncrasies and character. They are, in other words, beautiful despite their strange origin… or perhaps because of it:

To see all of the photos in DeSieno’s Surveillance Landscapes series, click here. And if you’re interested in more of his fine art photography, be sure to pay his website a visit.

(via DIYP)

Image credits: All photos by Marcus DeSieno and used with permission.Sometimes when I go to new locations, they can be so awe-inspiring that I feel photographically challenged. When this happens, I need to take a step back and think about the location’s special traits that fill me with such awe.

What is important about this area—is there some natural event occurring, or some irregular weather phenomenon? In short, what are the stories this new place is trying to tell me? Answering these questions often lends direction to my photography and helps me realize which stories about the area I want to share with others.

(Note: although I primarily photograph natural subjects, this technique works equally well with any location or subject).

I recently used this technique when I spent several days in the Namib Desert in Namibia last year. At first, being surrounded by these huge red sand dunes was overwhelming. What should I shoot first? As I explored the desert around me, I began to recognize several stories that this place had to tell.

The most obvious story was about the sheer size of the sand dunes found here. This is the oldest desert in the world—home to the world’s largest sand dunes. I had photographed sand dunes before, but never any of the massive size that I saw in this desert. The rust-orange massifs were more akin to sand mountains than something as temporary and fleeting as a dune. Some of the largest dunes stood over 1,000 feet (~304 meters) tall, dwarfing the sparse trees and flora that dared to grow at their feet. In the photo below you can faintly see a few trees, which give the enormity of the dunes a sense of scale.

Although this desert receives only 10mm of rain each year, amazingly there are large mammals that thrive here. This was story number two.

Here, a gemsbok oryx (one of Africa’s many species of antelope) roams among dry scrub and dying trees. With no ground water to drink, these animals rely on the occasional fog that rolls in from the Atlantic ocean. After the fog collects on plants and their fur, the oryx lick the scarce moisture from each others coats, sustaining themselves until the next foggy morning.

While I could take up-close portraits of oryx in other parts of Namibia, telling the story of these large antelope thriving in the desert necessitated using a shorter lens than I usually do for wildlife. A 400mm lens allowed me to include the massive red walls of sand that dominate this habitat.

Again, it was important for me to use unique elements of the scene to tell the story of that location.

A third aspect of this desert that I wanted to show photographically was the rust orange color of the sand. This reddish orange comes from the high iron concentration in the sand and the gradual oxidation of that iron. The older the dune, the more orange it becomes.

In order to offset the beautiful orange and red tones of the sand, I needed blue skies, giving my photos nice complimentary colors. Counter to most of my landscape photos, I opted to shoot in late morning or early afternoon (instead of sunrise or sunset, when the sky itself would be much warmer and closer in tonality to the sand). Had I not been thinking of how to convey the story of these ancient orange dunes, I likely would have kept my camera in the bag at this time of the day.

A final story waiting to be told about this area was the play of light across the contours and textures of the dunes. The photo below was shot at sunrise, creating extreme side light and casting a sharp shadow line along the front crest of the dune.

This strong shadow added shape and contrast to the dune.

The shadows in the image below manifested very differently in that they are not created by the shape of the dune itself, but rather by clouds moving in front of the sun. Because these dune ridges are actually quite far apart, a large cloud shaded only a single ridge at a time, giving me endless shadow patterns to choose from over the course of about half an hour.

This was my favorite image of this type, as the closest and farthest ridges are in shadow, isolating the middle ridge in sunlight.

When I first arrived in this vast desert, I was challenged by where to start with my photography. But by focusing on those stories that made this place so special, I could use them to direct my photographic effort. It even helped me develop a shot list to try to fill during my brief stay.

Next time you find yourself in a challenging location, stop and listen—perhaps the area will open up and share its stories with you.

About the author: Hank Christensen is a freelance photographer specializing in bird, landscape, and adventure stock photography. His work has been published on the cover of Outdoor Photographer and Bay Nature, and you can see more of his photos on his website, blog, Instagram, and Facebook. This post was also published here.Photographer Sam Forencich recently created something really special. It’s a timelapse of Oregon’s beautiful landscapes that stands out from the hundreds (if not thousands) of other Oregon nature timelapses out there, because he shot it entirely with infrared converted cameras.

Forencich says the final timelapse, titled Invisible Oregon, is at least in part an exploration of the nature of reality. “It’s no secret that many creatures exceed our abilities to interpret the world around us,” he writes in the video’s description. “The idea that we have to process the sensory data coming into our brains makes it seem like we are already a step removed from the real world.”

Invisible Oregon seeks to close that gap, at least in part, by revealing “the subleties of new growth” and the “dramatic intersection of sky and Earth” that only the infrared spectrum can truly capture.

Through the use of both timelapse and infrared photography, Forencich is expanding our sensory abilities to traverse time at an incredible rate and view parts of the electromagnetic spectrum that humans aren’t usually privy to. Using an infrared converted Nikon D750 and Canon 5D Mark II, he reveals Oregon’s landscapes in a way we’ve never seen them before.

Click play up top and enjoy.

Image credits: Video stills provided by Sam Forencich and used with permission.In this article, we won’t be talking about cameras and film only. Today I also want to share with you a beautiful region of Ireland that I discovered recently. It’s called the Ring of Kerry. But before we start our exploration of the Emerald Island, let me introduce our travel buddy: Kodak Ektar 100.

If you are not familiar with Ektar yet, it’s a fantastic colour negative film for those of you who are into deep colour saturation and high contrast.

Some compare it to slide film because of that, but the main advantage is that it’s a C41 film, which means that it can be developed anywhere for cheap, unlike slide films. The other advantage on top of slide films is the extended dynamic range—Ektar is capable of retaining more information, in both highlights and shadows, when capturing highly contrasty scenes.

The only downside I can think of is when capturing skin tones. It tends to give a reddish colour to white skins, which is not the most pleasing when shooting portraits. I know some photographers who get great results using this film for portraits, but I haven’t found the magic recipe yet (you’ll be the first to know when I get my hands on it!). If you are more into muted colours and natural skins tones, I’d suggest looking at Kodak Portra 160—it also has a very fine grain and is less saturated and contrasty than Ektar.

When underexposed, it tends to give a strong blue cast on your image so, to avoid this, it’s recommended to expose for the shadows. This will ensure that you don’t end up with dark areas that look blue instead of black and it will also warm up the global temperature of your image.

Here is an example of Ektar underexposed. The blue tint is due to the underexposure coupled with the blue hour but you get the idea.

The last point worth mentioning is that Ektar is scanning friendly. It’s honestly a pleasure to scan, as it doesn’t require any colour correction. Not all colour film handles being scanned so well, as you can see in this article where I explain how to correct colour negative scans.

Now that we’ve discussed Ektar, let me talk to you about our destination: The Ring of Kerry.

It’s a circular road 180km long that goes from Kenmare to Killarney. Most of it goes along the coastline of the Iveragh Peninsula and pass through many picturesque villages. The most common attraction are the Gap of Dunloe, Rossbeigh Beach, Moll’s Gap, and Ladies View… just to name a few.

Star Wars fan will also have a chance to visit Skellig Michael, which became popular thanks to the final scene where Luke Skywalker appears at the end of The Force Awakens. To avoid any disappointment, make sure that you plan your visit between the May and end of September—outside of these dates, there is no way to access the island by boat. I learned that the hard way, but it will be a good excuse for another trip around there!

Our first halt takes us on a peaceful tiny pier just outside a village called Sneem. We got there by accident, trying to make a U-turn because we got on the wrong road. We ended up staying there for a while exploring the surrounding woods and enjoying the serene atmosphere.

A few hours later, the weather changed and the clouds took away this stunning blue sky. We had to drive for a while before reaching Caherdaniel and its stunning view. As soon as we got there, the sun broke through the clouds and came out so did my camera!

Then we drove to Foilhommerum Bay on Valentia Island. This was probably my favourite part of the trip. On top of a beautiful location, I had the chance to see one of the most epic light that I have ever seen in my entire life.

In the second picture, you can see on the horizon a tiny island on the right side. This is Skellig Michael that you are looking at!

Our road ended in Killarney for the night, but this day wouldn’t be complete without capturing this delicate and soft sunset on the road.

The following day, we decided to explore the Killarney National Park. It’s right next to Killarney and if you are nearby you can’t do without stopping there for a few hours. Landscapes range from lakes to mountains peaks, and the park has a wide variety of wildlife to offer.

Unfortunately, the day was a bit dull and the light really flat so we stayed around the lake and savoured this time to relax.

The last stop on our short road trip was the Ladies’ View. This place took its name after the visit of Queen Victoria, who decided to make a stop there and enjoyed this scene with the ladies from her court. Unfortunately, this picture doesn’t give the credit this place deserves, but it’s absolutely beautiful and a perfect way to end your trip around the Ring of Kerry.

We were there in the end of January ,which is probably not the ideal season to fully enjoy it. Nevertheless, our eyes got plenty of treats! Before you go, here is a map I created for this trip showing the places worth seeing (although I’m sure there are many more).

About the author: Vincent Moschetti is an Ireland-based photographer who is in the middle of a year-long experiment where he’s shooting only film photography. You can find more of his work or follow along on this adventure by visiting his website or following him on Facebook and Instagram. This post was also published here.Recently a few things came up that makes me ask if or when does the idea of copying someone else’s photo go too far, or is it just a form of flattery derived from a source of inspiration via the route of imitation?

In the commercial photography world, this can have an impact in real dollars and sense (yes, that’s the word I meant to use), especially if you get caught deliberately copying someone else’s work. This was brought up in a recent article on PetaPixel—When someone copies your photo for Commercial Purpose—where the question was raised whether someone who (may have) copied many elements of a photo went so far as to push the boundaries of what’s right and permissible, or was it a violation of the original photographer’s copyright?

When there are things like models, props, studio lights, camera angles, etc., that gives the court leeway in deciding what elements of an image are protected expressions of copyright. There is a poll on this article where more than 2/3rds or the respondents felt what was done was unethical.

But the line seems to gray a bit in the world of landscape photography, although it’s not limited to this particular genre. Photographers often see so many great shots taken in great locations with great subjects, great lighting, and great composition—it seems to be a natural part of the learning curve to copy and build upon what has been done before.

Now it’s almost expected that when someone gets a great shot and posts it on social media sites where it garners lots of ‘Likes,’ people will be inspired by it and want to get their own version of that same shot.

But this goes beyond just going to the same place and then taking your own shot. It’s trying to get the *exact same shot* with similar angles, composition, and lighting. So if you go to extremes to make such an exacting copy, have you crossed a line, and is the resulting image really yours? Is it the person’s who originally shot it? Is it in some nebulous in-between landscape?

When, if at all, does imitation due to inspiration go too far? Is there an acceptable line, or is there a point where someone can go too far, or does the ‘nature’ of landscape photography negate that line?

This week, the middle of February, is a time when it seems hundreds of photographers head to Yosemite Valley to get their own version of a shot famously captured by my old boss, Galen Rowell, in his iconic image Last Light on Horsetail Falls.

Weather conditions dictate the variability of this phenomenon from year to year. While thousands of photographers may have been first inspired by Galen’s shot or the subsequent thousands that now fill social media newsfeeds every year, very few are probably standing there with a copy of Galen’s image trying to exactly recreate his shot. Even when someone comes up with a remarkably similar shot taken in nature, there’s always a reason to believe someone else could come up with a similar composition on their own. But I’ve also known photographers who’ve taken books out in the field to make an exacting, or as close to a complete copy of someone else’s image.

So again I ask, where’s the line? Is there one?

The featured image at the top is a great personal example of this quandary when, just today, I saw a similar image in my Facebook newsfeed posted by Charlie Cramer. I was immediately struck by just how similar they were. Now to be fair, I’ve seen Charlie’s version of this image dozens of times, including at the Yosemite Gallery, as well as those by several other fellow professional photographers. (Edit: ‘Dozens of times’ is an overstatement. Let’s just say I’d need more than one hand but less than three hands to count it.)

I actually included my image among My Favorite Landscapes of 2016. I’d shot Cascade Creek a number of other times from different vantage points, but on this occasion, I leaned over a rail at a certain point, pointed my trust Nikon D800 camera with my 24-70 f/2.8 lens, and framed up a quick shot.

A quick glance at the LCD immediately felt familiar—like in an “I know this shot” sort of way. I then proceeded to bracket my exposures to have various shutter speeds so as to have a varying effect on the motion and texture of the moving water. When I got home, I picked my favorite shot and processed it the way I would with any other shots, without any direct comparison or reference to Charlie’s shot. And yet I remain struck by the similarities.

It makes me wonder about the depth at which subconscious memories or inspiration played in this since I didn’t set out to make a direct imitation. Yet still, there it is—and looking at them, I wonder: is this *my* shot? Is it Charlie’s shot but taken by me? Or are these simply our own respective shots? I guess the real question is, once I looked at my camera LCD and had that “familiar” feeling, should I have then decided not to take the photo, or was I OK to go ahead and make my own version?

My own personal feeling is that it’s in that muddled gray area. Yes, it’s my shot, but in a way it’s also Charlie’s. He obviously shot his many years ago, and I’ve seen it numerous times before. I like this shot. I’m proud to have it in my collection. But in reality, I just don’t feel quite the same personal or professional attachment to it as I do with many other shots.

So… I’m curious, what are your thoughts? Whose photo is it? Is it an ethical shot with mere inspiration caused by another photographer’s work, or is it an unethical copy because it crossed some invisible line?

About the author: Gary Crabbe is an award-winning commercial and editorial outdoor travel photographer based in Pleasant Hill, California, just outside San Francisco. He’s also an award-winning author, photo editor, and workshop instructor. You can find his work on his website, Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. This article was also published here.When I was growing up, I spent several summers living with my father on the Isle of Skye in northern Scotland. As a teenager, I didn’t have an appreciation for the landscape, but as I grew up, I started noticing just how beautiful it really was. That is why I began photographing nature, and it’s really this love for the outdoors that drives me today.



Here are 7 simple beginner tips for shooting better landscape photos.

Tip #1. Learn from the icons

The most iconic landscape shots – the ones you likely have in mind – are those that appeared in magazines like LIFE or National Geographic. Something they don’t tell you is that many of the yellow and purple colors in their photos aren’t there in reality, this is what I like to call “the postcard effect.” If you’re striving for those kinds of pictures, you will have to emulate their tricks and add some colors after taking the picture. Often this is a process referred to as split toning.

Tip #2. Play with the colors

A common problem of landscape photography is that the colors come out too flat. That’s because you’re shooting across a distance and there’s a lot of visual information for the camera to capture. With filters and post production you can enhance the colors after the shoot. You’re probably familiar with the work of Ansel Adams, who used contrast to deliver the punch of his images. You can do something similar by upping the contrast of your shots, or even touching the color curve to bring out some shades that didn’t pop out initially.

Just be careful not to overdo your editing: too much processing and your landscapes look like fairy tales. When you’re in doubt, take another look at your photo a few minutes after editing it. Does it look realistic?

Tip #3. Shoot underexposed

I tend to always take my photos a bit underexposed. It’s easier to tweak the dark areas in post processing and to introduce some light than it is to fix an overblown sky. It’s also great to retain some shadows in your photos, as they add structure to the picture and gives a sense of depth.

Tip #4. No HDR

High Dynamic Range photos — HDR in short — became popular in the early 2000s as a way of getting more vivid colors and details in photos. Today, your phone or camera sometimes tries to use HDR automatically, but I’d advise you not to shoot with it turned on. The resulting images look very artificial — and while they do include more color, the reproduction isn’t very accurate. That’s why HDR has gone back out of fashion and you’d do better to stay away from it.

Tip #5. Don’t obsess over gear

Many people assume that you need a lot of fancy gear to take better landscape photos — but I am shooting with what’s basically a street photography setup: a 24mm prime lens, or alternatively a 35mm lens. I find that not having a zoom challenges me to be more creative with my framing, as it eliminates the temptation to just zoom in to the most important thing in the picture. By forcing yourself to move around without a lens that can zoom, you’ll explore more of your environment, thus leading to better and more unique positions for your landscapes.

Tip #6. Position your subject

What’s the subject of your shot? Just the landscape or also something within, like waterfalls or a mountain top. I’ve found that it helps to position the subject off-center, which changes a photo from a postcard motif into something more dynamic. I also like to include people in the photos, which provides a nice sense of scale to the nature around them and give the viewer an impression of actually being there themselves.

Tip #7. Be patient

Good landscape photos take patience. If you’re shooting on the street, you’ll know that there’ll always be something going on. A city moves quickly around you and generates new subjects all the time. For a great landscape shot you might have to wait hours for the light to come out right — or to simply spend a lot of time in it. I’m convinced that a great photo results from a love for the outdoors. So go out and immerse yourself in the landscapes you want to shoot!

About the author: Jonathon Davison is a photographer based in Berlin, German, and a photo editor at EyeEm, a global photo sharing service for photographers available on iOS and Android. The opinions expressed in this article are solely those of the author. You can find more of Davison’s work on his EyeEm page and on his website. This article was also published here.

Image credits: All photographs by Jonathon Davison
